Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, budget debates ought really to be highlights of parliamentary life. I think that is still a long way from being the case, however.
The Berlin Council has proceeded on the basis of an upper limit for the Budget of 1.135%.
The Commission is now quoting a figure of 1.07, and the Council wants a figure of 1.05.
1.27 is really the Agenda figure.
This is happening at a time when, as is well known, expenditure on the Balkans is increasing.
The total quoted so far of EUR 200 million for Serbia hardly even begins to meet the real needs.
Almost the same sum has already been donated to the election campaign.
The NATO war destroyed too much and left too much suffering in its wake.
The new political forces, which meet with this Chamber' s approval, have the task of engaging not only in political work but also in construction work and of removing the debris from the NATO war in the form of ruined factories, schools, hospitals, bridges and other structures.
I would particularly emphasise that we must accept responsibility for the fate of everyone in the country, including more than 500 000 refugees in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
No other country has accepted so many refugees.
Parliament is now being called upon to ensure that restraint is exercised in areas of social policy and to restrict funds for development policy at a time of increasing world poverty.
This already shows that the European Union' s ability to acquire the States of Central and Eastern Europe as new members not only depends upon reforming the institutions but also - and, I think, to a very much greater extent - challenges the European Union' s ability to deliver.
Unless a different budget policy is pursued, the very accession of these States will cause the poverty line to run still more deeply in Europe.
What is needed are neither speeches nor explanations, but practical and social action on the part of a European Union now acting as a single unit and in which Parliament is required to make its own contribution.
I welcome the opportunity to make a brief contribution to this important debate and to dwell on the importance of the agricultural budget and its relevance not just to farmers but to society in general.
Those with an interest in developing a sustainable agricultural sector will be aware that the central thrust of recent reform as agreed in Berlin is a continuing move from commodity support to direct income support for farmers.
So it is both a social and an economic measure and it is designed to bring prices into line with world trade, while at the same time attempting to retain the European model based on family farming.
A point not always made is that this sizeable budget provision is not just confined to support for farmers but is also a factor in the provision of cheap food for European citizens.
In some areas of agricultural activity, such as bee production, EU support represents the profit margin which in effect means consumers enjoy a quality food product at production costs and regretfully, as demonstrated in recent years, sometimes below the cost of production.
In Berlin last year it was agreed that the budgetary provision for agriculture for the period 2000-2006 will be over £506 billion, that the 15 Member States of the European Union will continue to contribute 1.3% of gross national product to the overall annual budget - which of course includes measures to finance the proposed enlargement of the European Union, a proposal which I and my other colleagues fully support.
We fully support the concept of enlargement and the provision of sufficient resources to make the applicant states' transition to membership meaningful.
Despite what has been agreed, I sometimes wonder if it is possible to achieve this objective within existing budget constraints without undermining the agricultural budget necessary for a sustainable rural sector in existing Member States.
In this regard I believe that we have to act as politicians; we cannot expect to be magicians in a situation where there may not be sufficient funds to develop the economies of the countries of Central and Eastern Europe along the lines that the existing Member States would want to see them developed.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, you see before you a frustrated Member of the European Parliament.
Frustrated because, after lengthy debates within the Committee on Budgets and after the commendable efforts of the general rapporteur, to whom I must pay tribute, I cannot see exactly what Parliament' s intentions are regarding the key problem of the revision of the financial perspective.
By and large, we have two standpoints, that of the Council which persists in wishing to fund the new requirements of Kosovo and Serbia from the budget total established in Berlin without revision, and that of the Commission which is proposing to revise the financial perspective in order to finance these new requirements without seriously affecting the other policies, particularly the MEDA programme.
To date, Parliament has always been in favour of avoiding redistributing funds within category 4 in order to finance the new requirements.
It therefore declared itself in favour of revising the financial perspective.
Today we feel that it is continuing to fight on this line, but not down to the last bullet.
In spite of the rapporteur' s bolder proposal, we have voted in a text which does not mention the word "revision" , as if it was too vulgar a term, the r word rather than the f word, nor does it mention amounts, as if it were possible to reach any negotiated solution without specifying the amounts involved.
I am concerned, and since I belong to a group that occasionally remembers that it was once Christian Democrat, I should like us to be faithful to the word of the Gospels and let your yea be yea and your nay, nay.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, first of all, I would, of course, like to thank all rapporteurs.
I believe they have worked very hard.
Every time, it is a feat of strength if the budget can be brought to a good close and I believe congratulations are in order here.
A budget is always more than a mere juggling with figures.
Behind each figure, behind each budget line, behind each allocation, there is a policy to be adopted, there are political goals, huge expectations and, more than anything, people.
I was able to experience this first-hand over the past two weeks when, during a trip in the Western Balkans, I visited Kosovo and Bosnia.
And I happened to be in Pristina when President Kostunica was welcomed in Biarritz with the necessary pomp and circumstance and was handed EUR 200 million in the form of winter aid there and then, no strings attached.
Ladies and gentlemen, Commissioner, that was a political act which was not particularly received well by the Albanian Kosovars.
I was asked why the Union does not seize the change of power in Serbia to put permanent pressure on the new regime, even if it was to set those 914 people free who are imprisoned in Serbian gaols forthwith?
And I am telling you loud and clear: Kostunica must be given his chance here and I therefore hope that he will give amnesty in the next couple of weeks or months, but meanwhile, I do want the introduction of those two new budget lines, democratisation and reconstruction, to be accompanied by political conditions, both from a political and budgetary perspective.
As far as I am concerned, Serbia should not receive any funding without giving us the guarantee of more stability and absolute respect for the rights of the Kosovars, the Montenegrins and for respect of the Dayton Agreement of November 1995.
For it is true that my visit to Bosnia taught me that the situation there is very problematic indeed.
All the people I talked to over there applauded the switch of power in Serbia, but they all feared a reduction in the financial resources at the same time.
A euro can only be spent once and may this serve as a caution to both you, ladies and gentlemen, as well as the absent Council.
There is a great deal to be done in Bosnia.
Just think of the return of the refugees and the clearing of mines.
I have visited the project.
Those people need funds urgently for if the mines are not cleared, the houses cannot be rebuilt and the economy of this very fragile state cannot be made viable.
A reduction in the financial resources translates in less stability in the Western Balkans.
I therefore back all efforts, together with Mr Lagendijk, to inject maximum funds in the Western Balkans.
If necessary, category four should be broken down in our view and the financial perspective should be reviewed.
Ladies and gentlemen, I do not want to see Europe remain a political dwarf and I certainly do not want another war in the Western Balkans, at less than 1 500 km from here.
Let us therefore, in the capacity of budget authority, assume our political responsibility.
Mr President, the Council really has surpassed itself in its proposed draft budget 2001.
Demands are increasing, whether we like it not, and yet the Council, year on year, has reduced the overall size of the budget.
As a percentage of European GDP, it has fallen from 1.27% to below 1.05%.
This has dramatic repercussions on funding for agricultural policy, social policy, employment, research and a whole host of other areas of economic, social and development policy, at the expense of the regions in the Union lagging behind and at the expense of the broader social classes.
In the final analysis, it is immoral to cut spending on agricultural policy, on the MEDA programme and on the socially excluded, in order to find the resources to finance the European Union' s commitments in Kosovo and Yugoslavia.
It was not the farmers and the poor in the Mediterranean who decided and went ahead with the NATO bombings, but it is they who are paying for the damage.
The damage in the Balkans needs to be restored, but it should be paid by for those who were responsible for it.
This budget is unacceptable.
The European Parliament has just one way of showing that it has self-respect and respect for the people in the Member States and that is to accept the amendment tabled by our group and reject the entire budget.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I only want to express an opinion on a part of this Budget, namely that relating to Serbia.
The elections in Yugoslavia have shown two things: that the people have finally had enough of the dictator Milosevic and that they have confidence in Professor Kostunica.
The challenge faced by the new President is, at the same time, a challenge to us Europeans.
The process of democratisation has only just begun.
The retreat of the old Serbian government and the formation of a transitional cabinet of experts, as well as the election of the new Serbian parliament on 23 December of this year, are important prerequisites for replacing the old socialist-communist nomenclature in the Republic of Serbia, just as it has already been replaced in Montenegro, and for opening the door to democratic changes.
Important institutional decisions have already been made in the last ten days.
The independence of the Yugoslav national bank has been secured. The customs administration has finally ceased to be an instrument of corruption.
It is now also important that the trade sanctions should be lifted by the EU as quickly as possible.
Commissioner Patten, who is in Belgrade today, ought to endorse the proposal made by those who exercise responsibility in that country, to the effect that all trade sanctions should be lifted and that firms associated with war criminals should be blacklisted.
In order to safeguard the success of the democratic forces in the elections, as well as Kostunica' s initial successes, we must do something.
The Yugoslav economy is completely ruined.
Our fellow MEP, Mr Modrow is no longer here, but he should be listening.
The economy has, in the very first place, been ruined because of incredible mismanagement on the part of Milosevic and his wife Markovic, who was, and is, also chairman of the Communist Party and to all intents and purposes the head of a large mafia.
In the second place, it has been ruined by the sanctions imposed upon the country because of Milosevic and, to a small degree, by the NATO bombings.
It is incredible that a country which formerly exported food can now no longer feed its people.
Winter is coming, and there is a shortage of gas, oil and heating equipment.
The fact that, following Kostunica' s election, the Serbian parliament immediately lifted the restrictions upon prices which had until then been frozen, led to a price explosion, which might cause people to misunderstand the policy pursued by Kostunica who, however, had no influence at all upon this decision.
Political stability depends upon the improvement of living conditions.
To put it simply: the people of Serbia ought neither to freeze nor to go hungry this winter.
That is why I most particularly welcome the fact that our fellow MEPs from the Committee on Budgets have made every effort to provide the emergency aid of EUR 200 million for this year, Mr Modrow, and not for next year, there still being two and a half months of this year left.
With these funds, we could show that Europe is the real partner in this region.
The latest elections contributed a further 80 municipalities to our democratic contacts at local level, so that we have a sufficient number of intermediaries at this level too.
Those responsible for politics and the economy in Serbia emphasise again and again that they do not wish to become dependent upon our help, but that they need our help now in order to alleviate need in the short term and that they will then need help to help themselves introduce a social market economy in the medium and long term and in order also to make necessary foreign investment possible.
I was very pleased today to hear Professor Kostunica officially acknowledge as crimes his predecessor' s actions against the Albanians and accept responsibility for these.
I am sure that the Albanian political prisoners will also be released soon.
Professor Kostunica deserves our support.
I am also sure that this Parliament will concur with this judgement of mine when he has spoken before us in this Chamber on 15 November.
The fact that it has today, at the same time, been decided to give EUR 175 million to poverty-stricken Kosovo shows that we do not forget the old challenges when new ones arise.
I very much hope that in the debate on the CARDS programme, which of course covers our financial commitment to all these countries, we show the same level of commitment and give each country its due.
If south-eastern Europe is to be a stable region, then individual States need to be stable, too.
Mr President, just two final touches to add to the 2001 budget, which are totally unconnected.
Firstly, I would like to say something about the backlog of payments which each year causes headaches as a result of the Council' s eagerness to cut payment appropriations, with the aim of obtaining this absurd and false saving, which looks very good on the national balance sheet, but which in reality only produces what we call a burden for the future, because it is clear that what has been committed to - commitments entered into - in previous financial years has to be fulfilled.
And what we have heard today from the Council, according to which there have not been any problems with payments, is not true.
It is not true, and I would have liked to have been able to remind Mr Patriat in person that in 1998 payments were even suspended for the Social Fund because EUR 1 million were lacking for the Structural Funds.
This is something that has been repeated.
There have always been a great deal of problems with payments.
Having said this, and also taking into account that the Commission itself has admitted that for 2001 applications from Member States for payments for the Structural Funds exceed the predictions of the PDB by EUR 8 000 million, I think that it is now time for the Council to start considering very seriously that we should do something about payments and not increase the backlog of payments.
I would also like to express my concern about the fact that the various Youth Parliaments have been included in the Socrates programme.
I am in no doubt about the reason for the existence of these parliaments, but there is no harm in pointing out that the Socrates programme derives from a legislative codecision procedure between Parliament and the Council, and that decisions such as this set a serious precedent which will, in the future, allow the inclusion of comments on programmes of any type of action that do not fit in elsewhere.
I think that this distorts the legislative procedure for adopting programmes and, above all, the content of those programmes.
Mr President, the current financial perspective clearly does not reflect our existing priorities and commitments.
The mainstay of Parliament' s strategy should be to force the Council to guarantee that new resources will be allocated to new objectives, in order to prevent these new objectives from being implemented using resources earmarked for existing priorities.
The European Parliament is fully entitled to call for the financial perspective to be revised, all the more so in the light of the draft budget proposed by the Council, which has shamelessly given us, in relative terms, the lowest budget in the last ten years.
If the financial perspective is not revised, we will inevitably be caught up in "financial engineering" , in redeploying resources and in cuts, either in general expenditure, social and environmental spending or in cooperation.
It is also true that in spite of this, appropriations for the Balkans will still be inadequate, not to mention the horizontal reserve, which will result in unacceptable constraints on cooperation policy, on the Cohesion Fund, or even on the issue of Timor, where the European Union has given firm international commitments.
We clearly appreciate certain aspects, specifically the fact that the year 2000 amounts for development policies have been retained.
This is not enough, however, to change our negative overall view of the draft budget, because it is inadequate.
Hence our demand for the financial perspective to be revised.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, we are talking about a Budget with some EUR 96.8 billion in commitments and EUR 94.7 billion in payments from Parliament' s point of view.
Far below the ceiling for own resources, therefore.
I believe that what matters is to use the 2001 Budget for a budgetary and administrative consolidation of the European Union while fulfilling the commitments which have been entered into, including those relating to the common agricultural policy.
The basis for doing so is to be found in the decisions made in connection with Agenda 2000.
I would also state very clearly in this Chamber that anyone who goes beyond this fails to understand the processes of adjustment and the structural changes at present under way in agriculture and in rural areas and will provoke a debate which might lead some day to Brussels' being told: we are sorry, the Commission is no doubt responsible for foreign trade and for competition law in the area of agricultural policy, but responsibility for everything else must again lie with ourselves because we are no longer going to allow the structures concerned to go downhill.
We have had to resort to the reserves in the different areas.
We do so not for the fun of it but because we want to make an impression and to see to it that responsible use is made of Parliament' s priorities.
We would not need to use these reserves if, for example, following an amendment to budget law or to the budget regulations - of the kind which certainly takes place at national level - the Committee on Budgets were to have the opportunity in future to block and freeze funds in the current budget year, if this were necessary and if Parliament' s views had not been taken sufficiently into account.
I want to say very clearly that, with regard to category 4, we on the one hand stand by the international political commitments which have been entered into and accept the new challenges.
For us, however, it is crucial that, on 15 November, the Commission should submit - as we shall demand that it do - a clear, detailed and intelligible report on how we are dealing with the commitments entered into so far and with the total arrears in payments.
I strongly advise the Commission to produce a thorough report so that we do not have to return to this problem area over the next few years.
Until these figures are available, there will be problems in releasing the general implementation reserve of some EUR 650 million.
Until this point has been clarified and discussed in detail, I flatly refuse to speak about any revision of the Financial Perspective.
It must also, of course, be made clear to the Council that it also has its share of responsibility for the deficiencies in the way that many external programmes have been handled.
I would state very clearly that we want to finance the programme for the Balkan region on the basis of the assessment to date, that is to say, however, not exclusively under heading 1 and not exclusively by revising the Financial Perspective, but by means of thoroughly sound multiannual financial planning.
I want to mention one final point which is also part and parcel of this issue.
In view of past experience, we want to help create a new culture of responsibility and administration at European level.
We say yes to 400 new jobs in 2001.
However, we would say just as clearly to the Commission that, before we are prepared to negotiate at all concerning the second tranche for 2002, we need a careful discussion and analysis of how, while respecting the substance of the acquis communautaire, Community law can be simplified, something which may save jobs both at Community level and within the Member States.
In the same way, we need a careful analysis on the part of the Commission of how, in the course of the enlargement process, European administration is to be developed.
So that we do not have to discuss these problems again in the next budget year, we should call for this right now so that the Commission is given a clear signal regarding the homework it has to do in the course of the next six months.
Mr President, unlike Mr Bourlanges, I am not frustrated by this procedure but I must say that this must be the most mind-numbing budget I have known in the Committee on Budgets for years.
Whilst there are so many underlying problems, there is relatively little evidence of this in this House, which might be unfortunate.
It is perhaps a kind of transitional year, a year wedged between last year' s nerve-racking events and those which may lie ahead next year.
In any case, not a great deal has happened.
There is, of course, one crucial event, namely that a start has been made with category four and with looking at ways how we will deal with it, but it is not yet entirely clear whether we have managed to resolve this, partly because the Council refuses to have sufficient input in the attendant thought processes.
The guiding principle has always been Berlin, Berlin, Berlin, but listening to the Minister, it appears that Berlin is out of the frame.
In fact, it is not in the picture ... or even in the credits.
It is as if Berlin never happened at all.
In addition, as Mrs Dührkop already pointed out, there is the fact that there are indeed problems with payment credits.
The Minister simply had his facts wrong.
We in the Social Fund have had problems with payment appropriations.
We should not forget that we are still in the initial stages and that a problem with payments will always occur later on.
Agricultural policy is also working out in our favour, because the euro is so low, which always leads to certain benefits.
It could well be the case that next year or the year after, we will all of a sudden have an enormous need for payment appropriations.
And then I will be interested to see if the Council is prepared to make the necessary credits available or if they will come up with a different excuse why it cannot be done.
This is the risk, in my view.
The system assumes that the payment appropriations more or less simply follow the spending patterns, but the Council adds its own mechanism, and it is that mechanism which threatens to undermine Berlin, despite the fact that Berlin is under way in real terms.
I would like to add one more thing. I do believe that the Committee on Budgets should be careful not to intervene too often or too horizontally in proposals put forward by the expert committees.
In my view, things have got somewhat out of hand this year and serious deliberation is what is now needed.
Mr President, we are to make decisions about the EU' s Budget at first reading.
This means, however, that we are only at the beginning of the Budget process.
That is important to note because we are at present at a stage entailing an unduly large increase in the EU' s Budget.
If the increase were to be carried out, this would mean further increased costs for all households within the EU.
For Sweden, this would involve approximately EUR 65 million.
I believe that most people are prepared to accept this, on the understanding that the money is used in the right way.
Where the present proposal is concerned, I am not however certain that people think it will be.
It is therefore a question of using the time well.
This applies, of course, to the Committee on Budgets and to the European Parliament, which have to do the necessary prioritising, but it is above all the Council of Ministers which has a clear responsibility.
The increase is inexplicably high in category 1, that is to say the EU' s comprehensive agricultural policy about which the Council of Ministers has the last word.
We are talking about an increase of more than six per cent, both for payments and commitments.
At the Council meeting (Budget), which takes place at the end of November, initiatives ought, in my opinion, to be taken to produce a significantly lower rate of increase for category 1.
If the Council does this, it will also be more credible in coming back to Parliament with a demand for corresponding measures to be taken.
Prioritising is important in all Budget work.
This applies to enlargement in accordance with the decision at last year' s Berlin Summit, as well as to our efforts to meet our commitments in Serbia.
By adopting the necessary priorities in the Budget, we shall tackle both of these historic commitments successfully.
As I see it, we shall be able to do this within the framework of the Financial Perspective backed by the European Parliament.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, first of all, I join in congratulating all the rapporteurs.
It is only right to highlight the efforts that the general rapporteur, Mrs Haug, has made in seeking an intelligent consensus, which I hope will not be frustrated.
But I would like to focus my comments on the ECSC operating budget, which needs to be examined in the light of the fact that we are on the threshold of the expiry of the Treaty.
Its final amount is modest and correct.
Our group relates the strategy for the general budget to the quality of spending and efficient management, and this also extends to the ECSC budget.
I share the concerns and opinions that the rapporteur, Mrs Rühle, mentioned this afternoon regarding the sections on research and social measures.
But what is also important is to insist that the allocations are used correctly.
A sector such as steel, thanks to technological research and development, has ceased to be an industry that only generates basic products and has become one that puts semi-processed products on the market with added value.
Therefore, sustaining and increasing research programmes in that sector is a key issue today, with the ECSC instruments, and in the future, when they disappear.
On the other hand, it is important for the peace of mind of thousands of workers, and compatible with the overall amount planned, that the level of aid planned for this financial year for the social chapter for coal should be maintained.
The ECSC operative budget for 2001 does not move away substantially from the line taken in recent years.
It therefore takes on the same faults.
You only have to look at the amount entered coming from commitments that have not been implemented.
This is not very serious with the expiry of the Treaty very close on the horizon, but it would be worrying if the post-ECSC legal framework maintained the possibility of prolonging such practices.
We are therefore paying close attention to the proposal for a decision on the financial consequences of the expiry of the Treaty.
The Commission will have to look at a transparent mechanism so that the European financial institutions can, at the correct time, evaluate what is remaining from the ECSC and be protected from any possible failures to pay by debtors and so that, through a system of public competition, maximum profitability can be achieved.
Mr President, one of the great privileges of parliamentarians is to talk about the budget.
As an old House of Commons man I am delighted that we have this opportunity here today.
There is an old saying: "No taxation without representation" .
However, when we look at the development budget there are all sorts of peculiarities which we should concentrate on.
We accept that there is waste and inefficiency in the development budget.
I know that the Committee on Development and Cooperation is looking very hard at it. So is the Committee on Budgets.
There was a reference earlier to Hurricane Mitch and money going to the people in those little islands.
In fact no money has gone to the people in the little islands because we could not get our act together and help the people who needed the money.
But my main point is about the ACP.
Two weeks ago we had the ACP Joint Parliamentary Assembly.
It is no longer a joint assembly. It is now a Joint Parliamentary Assembly.
And that brings me back to my original point about representation and taxation.
Now 35 Members of Parliament from 35 different countries come together twice a year as Members of Parliament to discuss development and mutual cooperation.
Yet when you look at this joint assembly, it does not actually control a budget.
Yes, it is a parliamentary assembly but it has no budget to control, because the EDF budget which we use for the ACP is apparently controlled by the Member States.
During my time in the House of Commons not once do I recall any debate about the EDF budget and I doubt whether there is any debate in the Member States about the EDF budget.
So who does debate, as elected representatives, the EDF budget?
I suspect no-one.
The Commission proposes and disposes.
We have a parliamentary assembly which does not have a budget.
We should look at this again.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I should like to add a remark to what Mr Deva has just said.
It is one of the real scandals of Europe that sums amounting to billions from the Member States have still not been placed under the control of the European Parliament and made subject to this Chamber' s budget law.
No-one controls this money, and this is entirely the responsibility of the Member States and of the Council and, Mrs Rühle, also of the red-green government in Germany which, despite having previously stated otherwise, is also not now prepared to take this step.
Secondly, reservations were expressed a few weeks ago in terms of what would happen if a movement really were to arise in Serbia.
Would the European Union be in a position to act in this matter at all? We had, it was said, not set aside any of the money we had generously promised.
I believe that, in the last few days, the European Union has shown, faster than the United States and faster than the Member States, that it is in a position to respond appropriately to such a situation.
Moreover, Parliament has this week, and before the Council too, reached important decisions to enable the developments which Doris Pack discussed actually to occur, namely the arrival of the initial sums before Christmas of this year and a situation in which people sense that the efforts on behalf of democracy are worthwhile.
That leads to my third remark on what now faces us.
I am concerned that, while our common foreign and security policy progresses ever further, becomes ever more skilful and even acquires a 'Mr CFSP' , and while we are also further developing the European security and defence policy and coming up with practical measures, we are, in the long term, spending less and less on foreign policy measures.
Special attention has again been given in this Chamber to the fact that we are beating a retreat from Latin America, Asia and Africa, and particularly from Latin America.
In the long term, it is therefore just not on to talk more about foreign policy and less about international solidarity.
We need to bring about changes in this area.
It is not right that the Budget should penalise other regions of the world, and it is also necessary for the Commission to bring about a situation in 2001 in which Commissioner Patten' s declared view prevails, to the effect that the money should flow more rapidly.
Mr President, I should like to join with Mr Pronk in asking you to look critically at the preliminary decisions of the Committee on Budgets regarding the deliberations of the specialist committees, in my own case the preliminary decisions on health and environmental policies.
For example, subsidising tobacco cultivation in the EU is simply no longer justifiable.
As you all know, this special form of cultivation is subsidised each year to the tune of EUR 1 billion, despite the fact that there is no market at all for European tobacco within the EU and it has to be exported.
What is more, we are working right now on the new directive on tobacco cultivation, the main objective of which is of course to explain to the consumer the harmful effects of smoking upon health.
This is supposed considerably to reduce tobacco consumption within the EU.
To go on subsidising tobacco cultivation at the same time is a downright contradiction in terms.
Instead, these subsidies must be removed step by step, though on condition that the farmers concerned are given structural aid for the purpose of switching production to other goods.
At the same time, budget funds from the Research and Information Fund ought to be made available for the purpose of researching into alternative forms of production for farmers who at present cultivate tobacco, and this is something we want to see happen.
I think these measures are at present the most sensible solution where the tobacco issue is concerned. I am no dreamer.
I know that this proposal is not at present capable of winning a majority, but I should like to call upon as many fellow MEPs as possible to vote in favour of this package of measures in order simply to set an example so that we might finally make some headway on this issue.
Another important point relates to the European Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products in London.
This definitely requires an increase in its budget, for we ourselves have of course given it a new additional task.
This agency is to promote the development of medicinal products - so-called orphan drugs - for rare diseases.
This has already been reported on today.
We ourselves have therefore arranged for corresponding legislation which did not come into force until April of this year.
It is merely being consistent now also to ensure that our decisions can be put into effect and that this agency' s funds are increased.
On the other hand, it would not be in our interests to support agencies whose work we cannot see as being of any discernible consequence and which do not produce any visible results.
In our view, that is the case with the European Environment Agency in Copenhagen.
The Committee on Budgets has also recognised this.
It is not a question of regularly increasing the funds of any old agencies but of promoting work of proven value.
This is what I am asking you to do, and I am asking you to vote accordingly.
Mr President, Commissioner, I come from Spanish Algeciras, opposite Gibraltar and not far from Morocco.
I have seen the fishing boats tossing in the harbour, a picture which spoke volumes, vividly illustrating the enforced inactivity of the fishermen.
Or was it, or is it, an illustration of our own incapability?
The fishermen are inactive, tired and disappointed.
For eleven months, there has no longer been an agreement with Morocco.
Mr Fischler is negotiating hard, but unfortunately without success so far.
Inhabiting, as they do, a region in any case lacking in infrastructure, the Andalusians are alarmed.
Four thousand ships lie at anchor. The Committee on Fisheries is alarmed, too.
Who is responsible for alternative jobs in the EU?
Under which Budget heading can we pay for possible forms of restructuring?
The new Finance Agreement is of no use, and I see that mistrust of EU politicians is growing.
A serious, robust and optimistic Budget is therefore all the more necessary.
The combination of need, scope of action and flexibility is a whole new chapter.
The Committee on Fisheries takes a lot of flack.
It is very often a target of multiple attacks for financial and political reasons.
Unjustly so.
We are open to justified criticism from our own ranks, too.
However, we also want to be listened to and, in the field of employment alone, we speak for as many as 41 000 jobs, for which there are no alternatives.
Of course we are dependent upon a significant amount of imports.
It is true that the market is increasingly looking for private sales channels, but we ought not to evade our socio-economic duty.
We therefore at least need adequately worded fisheries agreements, provided that they have been assessed convincingly.
We therefore agree with the division into compulsory expenditure without reserves and into the token entry with reserves which take effect whenever we want to sign new agreements, namely those which do not come into effect until next year.
I am confident of a positive vote in this area, that is to say in the fisheries area as a whole, for I believe that only this will constitute an expression of our common political will.
Mr President, I welcome the opportunity to contribute to this debate tonight.
It is probably the most important Parliamentary debate in a twelve-month period, when we debate the budget.
It is rather ridiculous that we have to fight to put forward the points of view of the regions we represent.
Those who are in charge of the future of this Parliament would do well to recognise it is a one-day debate they require, not a two-day debate on the budget in future.
I say without apology that I am going to address the effects that the European Union has had in my region.
I want to make it very clear that the European Union, insofar as Northern Ireland is concerned, has had the most direct and positive influence imaginable.
It has been good for Northern Ireland.
It has been positive for Northern Ireland and has delivered for Northern Ireland.
The peace and reconciliation programme which was brought about by three Members of this Parliament in conjunction with the former President of the Commission, Jacques Delors, has been very positive for Northern Ireland.
The partnership boards have been a success in that area.
They have been innovative and have introduced new ideas.
They have also brought about a bottom-up philosophy that had never been appreciated before.
I also have to make it very clear that we now have a fledgling new regional government in Northern Ireland of which my party leader, David Trimble, is the First Minister.
It is trying to build a new future.
You have to understand that Northern Ireland, throughout the last 30 years, through the terrorism, has suffered tremendously.
We are trying to find new ways forward.
We are trying to find ways in which we can work together.
We are trying to find ways in which we can put things together to support each other.
I would ask that we be given the flexibility to achieve that possibility, to achieve the jobs, to achieve the employment and to be able to put the people of Northern Ireland back to work again, back to work in real politics rather than looking into other reasons as to why they may want to disagree with each other.
That is the objective.
It is something we all have to look forward to.
I want firstly to thank Parliament, secondly to thank the Committee on Budgets for their continued support and understanding for my region.
I pay tribute to them for that.
Thank you very much, Mr Nicholson.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place on Thursday at 10 a.m.
Protection of personal data
The next item is the debate on the report (A5-0279/2000) by Mrs Paciotti, on behalf of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data by the institutions and bodies of the Community and on the free movement of such data (COM(1999) 337 - C5-0149/1999 - 1999/0153(COD))
Mr President, in countries with a high level of technological development, the protection of privacy is always more at risk, and therefore appropriate safeguards must be established.
The countries of the European Union are at the vanguard in the protection of privacy compared to systems adopted in other parts of the world, especially those countries which have implemented the two directives, Directive 95/46 and Directive 97/66 - on the protection of individuals with regard to the protection of personal data.
The European model considers the protection of personal data to be a fundamental right guaranteed by legally binding rules, based on the principle of peoples' self-determination of data, that is the principle whereby everyone must be able to decide whether and how personal data concerning him can be collected and used.
In this model, respect for standards and procedures is guaranteed by an independent authority and final jurisdiction lies with the judges.
Since a great deal of personal data is also collected and processed by the institutions and the Union' s bodies, the system of guarantees contained in the European model must apply to them as well.
Therefore, a rule laying down the right of everyone to the protection of personal data concerning him, which must be processed fairly for specific purposes on the basis of the consent of the person concerned and subject to control by an independent authority, has been included in Article 8 of the draft Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union.
Moreover, Article 286 of the Treaty establishing the European Communities, introduced by the Treaty of Amsterdam, lays down that Community acts on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of data - that is the two above-mentioned directives - apply to the institutions and Community bodies and that an independent supervisory body responsible for monitoring the application of such Community acts must be established.
The proposal for a regulation which is being examined by Parliament today implements these provisions, transposes the Community legislation and establishes the office of European Data Protection Supervisor, thereby providing appropriate, tangible guarantees of this fundamental right.
Over months of work and with the constant assistance of the Commission, we have attempted - and we can inform you that we have been successful - to produce a detailed regulation responding to the concerns voiced by the Council and by the Parliamentary committees responsible for assessing the regulation and formulating opinions.
The willingness of all the institutions concerned to discuss the matter resulted in exemplary cooperation which, it is my fervent hope, will make it possible for us to reach a consensus at the first reading.
The many joint amendments reproduce the majority of the solutions identified by the Council, and these already take into account the proposals made during the Parliamentary debate.
Acceptable solutions have therefore been reached, for example regarding the appointment of the European Supervisor and the Assistant Supervisor, which is to be agreed by Parliament and the Council from lists of names drawn up by the Commission following a call for candidates.
With the unanimous support of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, your rapporteur nevertheless insists upon certain amendments which, for example offer a novel solution to the much-debated subject of the scope of the regulation.
It is restricted to the Community context but a form of protection is provided for in respect of the activities of the institutions outside the first pillar; this solution is obtained by referring to the rules for the protection of privacy relating to the right of access to documents, governed by Article 225 of the Treaty establishing the European Communities.
In fact, Article 225, unlike Article 286, is also referred to in the Treaty on European Union.
Provision is also made for cooperation with the national supervisory authorities and with the authorities established in the third pillar, with a view to coordinating and gradually harmonising the entire regulation of this sensitive area.
Moreover, provision has been made for an autonomous budget heading, in accordance with the prevailing system for the European Ombudsman, in order to provide a greater guarantee of the independence of the Data Protection Supervisor.
I am confident that our untiring work will win the full approval of the European Parliament and the Council.
Thus, for the first time, codecision will apply at the first reading to an extremely complex text which is full of technical difficulties on the particularly sensitive sector of the protection of civil liberties.
The very technical complexity of the text suggests that it would be a good idea to postpone the vote until the next part-session in order to allow an accurate check to be carried out on all the different language versions, for this has not yet been carried out.
If this result is, as I hope, achieved, this will be due to the mediating capacities of the Presidency-in-Office of the Council, the positive contribution of the Commission and the sensitivity to public interest and the rights of the citizens displayed by the Members of Parliament of all the political groups which contributed to the adoption of the report by the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs.
I would like to thank them all publicly.
Mr President, the protection of personal privacy is a fundamental human right.
Every day, a host of personal data, for example in connection with telephone conversations and payments on the Internet, is recorded and put into circulation.
Personal data circulates within the EU in particular.
This proposal for a Regulation lays down sound bases for the protection of privacy.
Freedom of movement requires effective crime prevention, which is less successful without effective protection of privacy.
According to the proposal, the EU must not handle data concerning ethnic origin, political views, religion, health and sexuality at all.
Data concerning criminal backgrounds and security measures may only be dealt with if special conditions are fulfilled.
Such data may only be handled for legitimate reasons and if the individuals concerned are informed about the data.
I have been calling for a long time for independent European supervision of the protection of privacy, without new bureaucratic structures.
I think that Mrs Paciotti has come up with a successful proposal for a European supervisor able to guarantee the rights of individuals in relation to the institutions, to carry out supervision and to provide the institutions with advice.
At the same time, we must of course maintain and develop the cooperation that exists between the Member States' own data authorities.
It is important to establish a system that works and to merit people' s confidence.
The protection of privacy must therefore be developed.
The protection of personal privacy is included in the new EU Charter of Fundamental Rights.
In the future, we may perhaps be able to go to court for further protection in this area.
Those of us who stand for European values in a Eurosceptic country are now being given further arguments in favour of the EU, namely more effective protection of privacy, which is important for the citizens of a modern society.
Even if this matter has been rather difficult to deal with, I nonetheless want to congratulate Mrs Paciotti on a very good report.
I hope, however, that the model which we have used in this Chamber and which has somewhat hindered MEPs from participating on a broad basis will not act as a guide to the way in which we are to deal with these issues in the future.
Mrs Paciotti has been very successful in uniting all the institutions.
I therefore want to congratulate her, and I hope that the Chamber will support the report.
Mr President, our group considers that this is on the whole a good result and especially welcomes the fact that the area of application is extended to include the whole of Community law.
These rules are to apply, in particular, within the second and third pillars.
We welcome the wealth of initiative and invention which has characterised this work.
We should like to thank the rapporteur.
We think that the institutional solutions are very good.
We are not talking about some form of collegiate body but about a supervisor and assistant supervisor.
It is important to ensure that, important as data protection is, this must not mean limited access to documents within the EU' s institutions.
The European ombudsman has unfortunately been compelled to point out that the Commission has used data secrecy as a reason for limiting access to information about who had taken part in a meeting intended to sway the Commission.
This is an example of the misuse of data protection, which must not occur.
I really do hope it is ensured that the regulations will not be applied in that way.
We must also be aware of the fact that the European ombudsman and the data protection supervisor will be on opposite sides of the fence.
We must not be surprised if they sometimes end up in public discussion with each other.
The fact that their tasks have not been combined is extremely positive.
To some extent, this is an automatic transfer from the old Directive 95/46/EC.
In this connection, I want to take the opportunity to ask the Commissioner when revision of the general directive on data protection is to begin.
There is, of course, an obvious need to revise this directive with a view to modernising it, so that it meets those needs mentioned by Mrs Cederschiöld.
Data protection on the telecommunications network ought also to be reviewed.
Finally, I want to point out that, as a Finnish citizen, I have realised that the European Parliament is the only institution - the only elected body - to supervise the Commission' s decisions when it comes to the level of data secrecy in third countries.
We are aware of the famous case in which such supervision was applied.
The European Parliament is the only body which can democratically supervise decisions by means of the committee procedure which exists.
I now see that my own country is to alter the law relating to personal data which deprives elected representatives of any influence at all over the Commission' s decisions.
I therefore welcome the constructive dialogue we have established with the Commission, together with the appropriate committee procedure which will guarantee citizens' security.
Ladies and gentlemen, fifty years after the start of the construction of Europe, it is high time for the European Union to at last endow itself with a supervisory authority designed to protect the people of Europe from the potential abuses related to the multiplication of computer-based files containing personal data.
The exponential growth of the European Union' s tasks and jurisdiction, and the proliferation of Community bodies, mean that we must have a precise legal definition of the citizens' rights, and these should cover the transfer of information between European Union institutions and bodies.
Under the codecision procedure, the Council submitted a proposal for a regulation to the European Parliament on the basis of Article 286 of the EC Treaty.
This article specifies that data protection should be effective within the European Union by 1 January 1999.
Nigh on two years later, we have not yet brought matter to a conclusion. This means we should not get embroiled in a lengthy codecision procedure which would delay the implementation of this instrument even longer.
This is what Mrs Paciotti has done, and I really think our rapporteur has done a truly remarkable job.
Let us get to the heart of the matter.
The main bone of contention between the European Parliament and the Council is to do with the jurisdiction of this future supervisory authority.
Should it confine itself to the first pillar, i.e. the purely Community bodies, institutions and legal standards, or should it cover all Union-related provisions, i.e. the second and third pillars, such as Schengen or Europol?
We think it obvious that the risks related to the private lives of citizens and the misuse of citizens' personal data are far greater in the context of the third pillar, which at present is subject to little or no judicial and parliamentary control, than in the context of the first pillar, which falls within the jurisdiction of the Court of Justice.
In my opinion, it is clear that we would be closing our eyes to the problem if we set up an authority of this type to cover just the Community area, while the main problems arise and will, in future, arise due to third pillar bodies too.
Are you aware, for instance, that the Schengen system has amassed over ten million files on almost one and a half million citizens, and that Europol, whose sphere of competence is being incessantly expanded, has a central database of information from the various police forces of the fifteen Member States, all this supervised only by an authority with neither the powers nor the resources available to it to enable it to carry out another task properly.
The report which we are to adopt does not reflect this ambition.
The scope of the regulation adopted on the basis of the report is limited to the first pillar, i.e. to Article 286.
The second and third pillars will not be covered by this regulation and will therefore remain impenetrable, to the detriment of citizens' basic fundamental rights.
In addition to the restrictive reading of Article 286, however, it would have been possible to take Article 255 of the Treaty as a further legal basis in order to expand the scope of this regulation.
Indeed Mrs Paciotti attempted to do so by including a reference to this article in Article 12 of the regulation, but the Council refused to entertain this possibility.
There are many other problem areas which require some pragmatic evaluation if they are to be practicable.
In the end, though, our rapporteur is well aware of these problems and is anxious not to add another two years to the existing backlog.
We shall therefore offer her our support, in spite of everything, in the hope that the Council and, in particular, the Commission will be careful not to take advantage of the weaknesses of the text in order to attempt to make nonsense of it.
They must, furthermore, seek to implement means for the protection of personal data in the second and third pillars too at the earliest possible opportunity.
It is dangerous, in any case, to allow bodies such as Europol or the Schengen system to develop without parliamentary or judicial control.
Mr President, I too would like to congratulate the rapporteur on this report.
Effectively, the problem arises from the exclusions and exceptions in the protection of personal data with regard to the second and, in particular, third, pillars, but also from the exceptions already laid down by the directives as regards police activities and activities related to national security.
Like Mrs Boudemiene-Thiery, I feel that these activities give the greatest cause for concern in terms of citizens' privacy.
In my opinion, the rapporteur has done everything feasible to extend the possibility, at least of cooperating and probably of exerting influence on this matter, and so we fully support her report.
Having said that, I would like to take advantage of the fact that the Commissioner is here to say that it would appear appropriate to concern ourselves not only with protecting citizens in respect of new technologies but also with the use of these technologies to increase the European citizens' means of intervening and interacting with the European institutions.
I feel that other directives should be applied, in a similar way to the directives on privacy in the context of the Community institutions, such as the Directive on electronic signatures, in order to allow the citizen to interact telematically with the institutions as well, by means of petitions, appeals to the Ombudsman, competitions and appeals to the Court of Justice.
This would increase the channels for protecting the citizens - an extremely important element - but also make it easier for them to act, to be active and to interact with the institutions.
This point is not, of course, made in the Paciotti report, but I wanted to take advantage of the opportunity to raise the issue.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, while I congratulate Mrs Paciotti on her excellent work, I would also emphasise the need to move quickly in this field, which was, in fact, the purpose of completing this dossier at first reading.
In today' s modern society, a huge volume of personal data is collected, recorded and processed every day.
The European public' s concern about whether its privacy is being protected or not is therefore quite legitimate, as are its hopes that a balanced solution will be found to safeguard and guarantee their rights and freedoms.
Neither of the two directives currently in force in the European Union to guarantee protection against the improper use of personal data applies to the Community institutions.
It is therefore a matter of urgent necessity for us to put into practice what was agreed in Amsterdam and to approve a regulation that gives individuals rights protected by law.
This regulation must also set out the obligations in the field of data processing incumbent on those responsible for such activities within the Community institutions and bodies. Finally, we must have a regulation that creates an independent supervisory body responsible for monitoring the processing of personal data undertaken by Community institutions and bodies.
We must move ahead with the creation of this supervisory body - the European Data Protection Authority - in the hope that in the medium term, it will be given new powers including those currently exercised by other supervisory authorities.
We also hope that it will create a single secretariat that will ensure that all cases submitted for monitoring are treated in the same way.
The Commission would first and foremost like to highlight the commitment we made to the citizens of Europe to ensure protection of the personal data processed by the institutions of Europe.
We are approximately two years behind schedule in relation to the date set in Article 286 of the Treaty establishing the European Communities, hence the urgent need to reach agreement on this matter.
The Council, with the crucial encouragement of the Presidency, succeeded in overcoming the problems raised by a number of delegations, to ensure that the proposal for a regulation will most probably enjoy the unanimous approval of the Council.
The European Parliament, in turn, demonstrated great determination in order to enable a decision to be made at first reading, and I should like to express my appreciation and my thanks to your rapporteur, Mrs Paciotti, who has spared no effort, with the support of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, to ease the path of this agreement.
By taking the Council proposal as a starting point and encouraging that a solution acceptable to all three institutions regarding the scope of the regulation be adopted, Mrs Paciotti has to a great extent made the way clear for agreement at first reading.
The Commission has, in turn, also played a part in initiating and mediating between the Council and Parliament.
The Commission also decided not to hold up the adoption of an instrument that is significant for the protection of citizens' personal data.
Even though it considers that the outcome is not completely satisfactory as far as it is concerned, the Commission in turn decided to adopt the text produced as a result of the discussions in the Council and Parliament as reflected in the Paciotti report, and will therefore reject any other amendments to its original proposal.
More specifically, the Commission' s position on the amendments contained in the Paciotti report is as follows.
Amendments Nos 1, 2, 4 to 10, 12 to 40, 42 to 54, 57, 58 and 60 to 64 reflect the Council text on the points to which the Commission can give its assent.
These amendments are therefore acceptable.
Amendment Nos 55, 56 and 59 differ from the Council text, but they were the result of a political agreement between the rapporteur and the Council Presidency.
Since the Commission has decided not to obstruct the adoption of the regulation at first reading on the basis of this compromise text, it will accept these amendments.
Amendments Nos 3 and 11 differ from the Council text, but they were the result of a political agreement between the rapporteur and the Council Presidency.
The Commission has decided not to obstruct the adoption of the regulation at first reading on the basis of this compromise text, on condition that a statement be included in the Minutes recording its legal position at such time as the Council approves the regulation.
If this statement is made, the Commission will accept the scope of the regulation being limited exclusively to first pillar activities.
It will also highlight the need to subject personal data processing under the second and third pillars to clear legal regulations.
In the view of the Commission, it will be possible to adopt such regulations on the basis of Article 286.
It therefore reserves the right to propose legislative initiatives to this effect.
The Commission further reserves the right to subject the processing of personal data carried out under the second and third pillars to the principles contained in the regulation until such time as the regulations applicable to said data processing be implemented.
The Commission considers that the wording of Amendment No 41 is not compatible with its right of initiative, and therefore rejects this amendment.
Amendment No 69 is a correction to Amendment No 41, presented by the rapporteur, Mrs Paciotti, in consultation with the Commission and the Council Presidency, with a view to safeguarding the Commission' s right of initiative.
The Commission supports this amendment, and I should like to thank Mrs Paciotti for tabling it.
The European Data Protection Supervisor will in fact play a leading role in Community institutions' respecting the provisions protecting citizens' personal data.
It goes without saying, then, that his opinion on the legislative proposals to do with the protection of personal data will be very valuable insofar as it will be a major contribution to the legislative debate between institutions.
It goes without saying, moreover, that the Commission, in framing such legislative proposals, must be free to make the appropriate proposal at the time it thinks right.
Amendment No 69 would seem to be acceptable to the Commission inasmuch as the wording does not entail a challenge to its right of initiative.
The Commission, therefore, understands this amendment as obliging it to consult the European Data Protection Supervisor after adopting its proposal.
The text would be improved if it were amended to make that clear, perhaps this can be done when it is proof-read.
In any case, the Commission will make a statement to this effect when the regulation is adopted in the Council.
In order to honour the political agreement made with the Council and the rapporteur to enable the regulation to be adopted at first reading, the Commission rejects all other amendments which were not part of the Paciotti report adopted by the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, except for Amendment No 69 which is a correction to Amendment No 41.
Thank you very much, Commissioner Bolkestein.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.
Outermost regions of the EU
The next item is the report (A5­0285/2000) by Mrs Sudre, on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, on the Commission' s report on the measures to implement Article 299(2): the outermost regions of the European Union (COM(2000) 147 - C5-0247/2000 - 2000/2135(COS))
. (FR) Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, let me first of all thank the members of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism whose comments and amendments have contributed towards enhancing the report which I am presenting this evening.
The present and future fate of the seven European regions most remote from the continent has given our committee the opportunity to unanimously adopt a constructive and balanced document, the product of lengthy consultation.
The Azores, the Canaries, Guadeloupe, French Guiana, Madeira, Martinique and Réunion form a separate category whose uniqueness has now been recognised by the Treaty of Amsterdam on the basis of an innovative concept: they are defined as 'outermost regions' .
The Treaty recognises that the outermost regions have a difficult economic and social situation, aggravated by special handicaps which, because they are continual and combined, are extremely prejudicial to development in these regions.
This is the reason why it is essential to ensure the widest possible application of the current rules and to use the most appropriate instruments to solve the practical problems faced by these regions and, where necessary, derogations adapted to the regional situation, without this posing any serious threat to Community interests.
The report published by the European Commission on 14 March 2000 is not, strictly speaking, a response to the demands of national and regional authorities in the outermost regions.
The Commission specifies that it is unable to provide answers to all the questions; it often confines itself to proposing guidelines intended to continue and consolidate certain established instruments and further reserves the option of looking into the problems on a case by case basis.
Article 299(2) primarily expresses a political will, supported on repeated occasions by the European Council and, today, by the European Parliament.
The chief objective of my report was to remind the European Commission of this political will in order to put an end to the unfortunate impression of reluctance or inertia that we are currently getting from the Commission.
As a matter of urgency, therefore, the staff complement of the Interdepartmental Group attached to the Commission Secretariat should be strengthened at the earliest possible opportunity in order to ensure that all proposals for acts which are general in scope are accompanied, when considered by the College of Commissioners and on the basis of Article 299(2), by a simplified sheet outlining their potential impact.
My report urges the Commission to prepare a genuine multiannual work programme, accompanied by a detailed timetable, giving the most comprehensive details possible of the measures planned, and providing all the essential guarantees concerning the provision of the resources required to ensure the viability of the measures and to ensure that the measures concerned are taken on a long-term basis where they are intended to deal with intrinsic handicaps.
In order to rule out any misunderstanding concerning the Commission' s reluctance to make full use of the scope afforded by Article 299(2), I propose that an enlarged forum for dialogue should meet annually and an annual report should be drawn up.
In response to the Commission, my report specifically investigates a number of areas falling within the scope of activities of the European Union. I shall give just a brief overview of these this evening.
The Commission has acknowledged that the agricultural and fisheries measures need to be revised or upgraded.
However, this second revision of the POSEI regulations will take place in a very difficult budgetary climate which may have a major bearing on the substance of the programmes, particularly the level of aid granted.
By way of example, in its draft budget for 2001, the Commission has proposed an outrageous cut in the budget for implementation of POSEI, giving rise to an acute sense of disquiet among the many agricultural producers in the outermost regions, on whose behalf I am speaking before you today.
In addition, we need optimum coordination and use of all the instruments available at Community level, in particular the Structural Funds, state aid schemes and tax and customs policies.
The success of the new Community policy to assist the outermost regions calls for action geared to the strategic areas of the world economy: transport, energy, the environment, the information society, research and technological development.
In this way it will contribute to promoting economic and social progress thanks to an increased level of employment.
The geographical situation and island status of the outermost regions must enable them to become active frontiers of the European Union.
Moreover, there is an urgent need to initiate an analysis of the impact of the new ACP-EU Partnership Agreement, signed in June 2000 in Cotonou, and other international trade agreements with a view to assessing their repercussions for the outermost regions and drawing up measures to compensate producers in those regions liable to face additional competition which they are unable to withstand.
To conclude, finally, with a subject that has a bearing on our immediate future, the process of enlargement is unquestionably an essential element in the construction of Europe, but an evaluation of its implications must be undertaken as a matter of urgency as of right now in order to prevent the aid duly allotted to the outermost regions and the projects resulting from the implementation of Article 299(2) being brought into question.
Mr President, the rapporteur, Mrs Sudre, has done a good job on her report on the outermost regions.
On behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, I would like to thank her for the way that she took on board our amendments and points of view, both in the spirit and in the actual text of the report.
From the point of view of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, what I would like to point out is that, in actual fact, we can only treat equally what is equal.
It is an attempt to establish an entirely uniform legal order for these outermost regions, which are separated from the rest of Community territory, from mainland Europe, by thousands of kilometres, and which are divided into small island regions with very difficult conditions for raising capital and for transport, which prevent the general rules for competition in the regions from being applied.
I would therefore like to draw attention to paragraph 21 of Mrs Sudre' s report, which indicates that, with regard to state aid, the application of the third paragraph of section a) of Article 87 should be automatic, because the reason behind the differences in that section stems from the aim of achieving equality in the competition system.
Only through a general derogation in favour of the outermost regions will companies located in those regions be on an equal footing with companies located on mainland Europe.
I must also point out how Mrs Sudre' s report refers to the need for specific tax and customs provisions for the same reasons.
When regions are so distanced from the continental nucleus, trying to automatically apply the tax and customs rules that are applied in the continental nucleus would mean putting those outermost regions at a disadvantage.
For example, on the subject of transport, in paragraph 26, the application of the rules on state aid to the ports and airports in a system of free competition would mean depriving those regions of the essential public service of ports and airports, which in outermost regions would never be a normal private activity, but an essential public service activity.
The Commission has sent a communication, which is a programme, a sort of timetable for what is going to be done.
We hope that the Commission will carry out this timetable or programme and, above all, we hope that the great institution that the Commission currently has, the interdepartmental group, will remain in contact with the outermost regions, informing the central authorities of our needs and our specific problems.
I therefore congratulate Mrs Sudre, and we wait with great interest for the Commission' s proposals to be developed into rules, so that the specific characteristics can soon be taken into account, as established in paragraph 2 of Article 299 of the Treaty of Amsterdam.
Mr President, Commissioner, I have a genuine admiration for the report by Mrs Sudre so what follows is in no way critical of it or of her.
Nonetheless, it illustrates what I believe is a much more widespread problem about the relationship between reports and opinions, particularly those of a non-legislative kind.
For example, in this report only 25 words survive of the conclusions unanimously adopted by the Committee on Fisheries.
The bulk of the section dealing with fisheries actually consists of an amendment to the motion for a resolution tabled in the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism.
There is nothing the Committee on Fisheries would object to in the paragraph concerned.
Indeed, it covers certain issues more explicitly than the opinion does.
On the other hand, some significant points in the opinion do not figure in the final version of the resolution.
Given the importance of fisheries to the outermost regions, I can only be saddened by this.
I appreciate that differences of perspective mean that it will not always be possible to reconcile views expressed in the lead committee and other committees.
My concern is rather that we do not currently have any standardised mechanism for making an attempt to do so.
I am asking, therefore, whether the President of Parliament would be prepared to look at ways in which improvements could be made, for example, by consultations prior to voting or by adjusting the order in which votes are taken.
Without such improvements, we risk losing the benefits of a great deal of expertise, not just to our own detriment, but also to the detriment of those we seek to serve.
In the meantime, and on this particular report, I would respectfully request both the Council and the Commission to look at the conclusions that are not contained in the motion for a resolution, as well as the ones that are.
Mr President, for the European Union this is simply one more debate of the many that we hold.
For the outermost regions this is the most important debate that the European Parliament can hold concerning them.
In fact, what we say here today and how we vote tomorrow will be front-page news in the seven outermost regions, and the news reports on the regional television channels will report extensively on what we say and decide here.
For many Europeans, some outermost regions are nothing more than a holiday destination on the map.
This may even be the view of some of our fellow MEPs of the outermost regions.
For those of us who are speaking here tonight on behalf of our native regions, this is a very negative view, and, of course, a deeply mistaken one.
Behind this idea, beyond our landscape and an exceptional climate, is the social and economic reality of regions that are among the least developed in the European Union, with the highest levels of unemployment and with huge structural problems that impede our development.
For more than a decade the European Commission has been aware of our problems and our particular characteristics.
This is the first debate that the plenary session of the European Parliament has held about our regions since the Treaty of Amsterdam included a new article on them.
So far, since an interdepartmental group was set up for the outermost regions under the presidency of Mr Delors, we have travelled a long and fruitful road, and I must express the deepest gratitude of the Europeans from the outermost regions to those who have presided over that group.
The Commission document for implementing paragraph 2 of Article 299 of the EC Treaty is a good document, and our rapporteur, Mrs Sudre, has done well today by offering us an excellent report.
With this Article and with the measures taken in order to implement it, we have a legal basis that until now we were lacking, and a good tool for our development.
Mrs Sudre has succeeded in putting together a balanced report that includes many of the amendments - more than 100 of them - which were tabled for the initial draft report.
One of these amendments proposes the implementation and application of the policies of the financial instrument for fisheries.
What I wish to highlight here today, Commissioner Barnier, is that, for the outermost regions, while Community law fully applies, it is essential that those rules be modulated and adapted in order to stimulate rather than impede their economic and social cohesion with the rest of the European citizens.
The internal market and the rules that govern it do not benefit the outermost regions to the same extent that they benefit Europeans on the continent.
The natural limitations of our island markets, thousands of kilometres away, mean that our businesses have difficulty being competitive: problems with transport, communications, supplies, running costs.
This is why we have so many problems generating wealth and creating employment.
Our unemployment levels are among the highest in the European Union.
It is therefore necessary to implement a series of measures which Margie Sudre' s report covers in detail.
In our view these measures need to go beyond regional development policies, because our shortfalls and handicaps are structural, not temporary.
We will always be far away and we will always have difficulties because of the fact that we are islands and because of our landscape, which is beautiful but also harsh and difficult to overcome.
We are not asking for subsidies.
We want to have tools that will enable us to develop.
The outermost regions bring Atlantic, American and African dimensions to Europe, which enrich our cultural, political and economic diversity, of which we are all rightly proud.
Mr President, Commissioner, Mrs Sudre, we must bear in mind that the opportunity for us to debate here in this House today on the subject of the outermost regions is the result of a process of slow maturation.
The fact is, even though, as early as the Treaty of Rome, reference was made to the French overseas departments, we had to wait until 1989 and the programme of options specific to the remote and insular nature of these regions, the notorious POSEI programmes, for the European Union to at long last acknowledge that the permanence and combination of structural handicaps affecting the outermost regions justified special treatment in comparison with the other regions of the Community.
Eight years later, the Treaty of Amsterdam with its Article 299(2), the subject of our discussion today, gave rise to the hope that one day the terms 'growth' and 'employment' would mean the same thing throughout all European territory.
So, it has been a long wait, and the hopes expressed by our peoples have built up throughout this long wait.
I therefore feel entitled to confess that I felt rather disappointed when I read the Commission communication.
Ladies and gentlemen, the time for stating good intentions is behind us, what we need is practical action and we need it now.
We need a specific timetable, one that will be respected.
We need real financial commitments, not, as we have in the 2001 budget, POSEI appropriations that, at the moment, have been cut by 25%.
Most especially we need guarantees that this action will continue in the long term, because the handicaps of these regions, as listed in Article 299(2) - remoteness, insularity, small size, difficult climate - are not about to disappear.
I am therefore pleased that the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism has adopted a bold and ambitious stance on state aid, tax schemes and the implications of enlargement.
I am pleased to see that the committee has adopted the bulk of the amendment I tabled.
I should, moreover, like to pay tribute, at this point, to the rapporteur, Mrs Sudre, for her open-mindedness and her consultative approach, which made it possible, with everyone joining forces, to successfully complete a report which offers our regions real hope.
Indeed I am convinced that the young people of our regions can actually glimpse a way out of the tragic unemployment which so drives them to despair, if we do manage to shift from a basically financial strategy, necessary, admittedly, but inadequate, to a more comprehensive strategy based on real recognition of our unique characteristics.
Ladies and gentlemen, Commissioner, the outermost regions are already the very emblem of the diversity, and hence the wealth of the European Union.
Tomorrow they may become a laboratory providing the finest illustration of the effectiveness of the experiment of the European social model.
We need audacity, intelligence and compassion.
I have no doubt but that the proposals which the Commission will submit to the Council will be characterised by these qualities.
Mr President, Commissioner, I would first like to congratulate Mrs Sudre for her excellent and very successful report.
At the same time I bring greetings from Mr Sánchez, who would have liked to be here at this debate, but has not been able to attend yet, owing to illness.
He has always stressed the importance of this report and worked hard in its favour.
The European Union must see to it that the outermost regions are involved in the Union' s development.
Adapted action, which is meant to support the outermost regions, is justified as a result of the unfavourable conditions that prevail in these areas.
This is especially the case when the regions in question are very dependent on just a few or even just one source of livelihood.
In talks between the European Union and external countries and international organisations attention must also be given to the special sensitivity associated with certain products in remote regions.
Neither may EU enlargement be allowed to cause these regions to fall outside the sphere of influence of regional and structural policy.
Our group is also in favour of broadening the scope of Article 299(2) of the EC Treaty, which will strengthen the positive achievements of the POSEI programmes in remote areas.
Owing to permanent unfavourable factors the special status accorded remote regions and the special assistance they should receive are justified, although differences should not be evened out by means of permanently defined versions of Internal Market rules and permanent entitlement to structural funding.
In my opinion, it is very important that the outermost regions are integrated into the trans-European transport, energy and telecommunications networks.
It is also necessary to look into the possibilities of new measures targeted at remote areas that would complement the policies and actions at present being implemented within the European Union' s own area.
The economic development of the regions must be supported through, for example, various direct and indirect taxation solutions.
Mr President, Commissioner, as Mrs Sudre rightly emphasises in her very commendable and extensive report, it is indisputable that the outermost regions have five characteristics which put them at a permanent or very long-lasting disadvantage.
Firstly, their geographical proximity to non-EU States and simultaneous membership of the European Union. Secondly, their relative isolation because of their great distance from Europe.
This inevitably leads to a situation in which these objective handicaps can, also in the longer term, only be offset, with a view to achieving cohesion, when the necessary financial resources are made available on the basis of Article 299, paragraph 2.
Through this article, the outermost regions should be so placed as not to be subject to permanent reductions in their budgets as a result of the Budget debate.
Just as you, Mrs Sudre, as the representative of the outermost regions, rightly call for solidarity, I would also request solidarity on your part where the interests of the Objective 1 regions are concerned, in the sense that no reductions in funds should be implemented for as long as the regions concerned are still handicapped in comparison with the developed regions of Europe.
The proof of the pudding is whether, in contrast to the agreement on how best to proceed expressed by most of the groups today in the Budget debate, we want to meet new political necessities not with new money but at the expense of policies which have still not been implemented.
This question will become that much more relevant the closer EU enlargement towards the East becomes.
I am convinced that it is now already clear that, without a change to the Financial Perspective, it will not be possible to solve this problem.
Allow us simply to act according to the proverb, 'Do not put off till tomorrow what you can do today.'
Mr President, Commissioner, the European Parliament is helping by means of this report to relaunch a policy for the outermost regions, as laid down in Article 299(2) of the Treaty.
The hesitations and the occasional contradiction we have seen in the Commission' s action in this field recently would therefore be at odds with this.
All of the Treaty' s articles must be complied with and all of them must be guaranteed effective implementation. Article 299(2) can be no exception.
There are therefore grounds for commending the position adopted by the European Parliament and to praise the balance, competence and experience demonstrated by the rapporteur, Mrs Sudre, and the contribution made by all those who worked together with her, particularly the other seven Members from the outermost regions.
Because I am under pressure of time, I will try to highlight the fundamental aspects of the report.
I feel that as well as promoting the fairness that underpins changes in policy, systems of derogation and specific measures, in other words dealing in the same way with things that are the same and differently with things that are different, the important thing is that in my region, as in the other outermost regions, people should be able to live in dignity.
This requires involvement in productive activities that guarantee a growing degree of self-sufficiency.
Since the economy of the outermost regions is classed in Article 299(2) of the Treaty itself as being dependent on a single product or on a limited range of products, we must provide incentives for potential diversification and, at the same time, create better conditions for producing what people actually have the means and the ability to produce.
What cannot, under any circumstances, be allowed to happen is that we help to eradicate the few comparative advantages that we have.
In the Azores, our main product is milk.
If we are to take Article 299(2) of the Treaty seriously, I can only hope for an improvement in our framework for producing what we actually have the means and the ability to produce.
Mr President, Parliament, and in particular its Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, has been the driving force for approving specific policies and programmes for the outermost regions.
The unanimous approval by the members of the Committee on Regional Policy of the report presented by Mrs Sudre demonstrates the European Parliament' s adherence to one of its most important commitments.
I should therefore like to congratulate the rapporteur and the Committee on Regional Policy on their excellent work.
With the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam, the legal basis of these specific policies was established and their scope was increased.
One of the areas in which this approach has had the greatest impact is agricultural policy.
By means of various partial derogations from the principles of the CAP, and through the implementation of specific programmes for agricultural development, we have been able to see an end to the desertification of archipelagos such as the Azores.
Those living in rural communities on the islands have also seen an improvement in their living conditions.
The experience of almost a decade and the new challenges created by developments in the common agricultural policy suggest that these programmes should be revised in order to sustain the ability of these regions to survive in the new climate of competition.
The Treaty specifically stipulates that economic dependence on a small number of products is one of the factors on which the European institutions are bound to adopt specific measures for the implementation of common policies.
The dependence of agriculture and the whole economy of the Azores on milk production is unparalleled anywhere else in the Union.
All of us in the Azores therefore hope that the Commission, in view of the Treaty and in view of Parliament' s position, will rapidly propose the necessary changes to the way the CAP is implemented in the Azores.
Mr President, Commissioner, had the Treaty of Amsterdam not included Article 299(2), we would not be here today, debating this excellent report by Mrs Sudre, whom I wish to congratulate on her outstanding work.
This legislation really is of considerable importance.
Under this article, the outermost regions obtained recognition by the European Union of a genuine right to be different, a right to be dealt with on a specific and special basis reflecting their unique situation, a situation that is completely different to that of the rest of the European Union.
This is now recognised legally and constitutionally and no longer, as was the case until Amsterdam, simply through declarations annexed to the Treaties, which had merely political status.
It should be noted that this right to be different is nothing more than a demonstration of the principle of equality, which also requires different treatment for anything that is different.
I reject reactionary and populist interpretations of the principle of equality, which seek equal treatment for things that are not the same.
Article 299(2) is therefore a crucial instrument in various way: firstly, in helping to promote equal opportunities for European citizens who are resident in the outermost regions.
Secondly, it is crucial to promoting full and successful integration of the outermost regions into the European Union and into the dynamic of the single market.
Thirdly, this article is crucial to enabling the outermost regions to respond better to the challenges posed by globalisation and by the enlargement of the European Union, to which they are particularly vulnerable.
This is the only reason we want Article 299(2), not in order to secure any privileged status for ourselves.
Mr President, Commissioner, the qualitative leap represented by Article 299(2) must be matched by an identical qualitative step forward in the special treatment that the European Union must give to the outermost regions.
Furthermore, this must go beyond POSEI, the Programme of Options Specific to Remoteness and Insularity.
This qualitative leap must be reflected in the definition and implementation of a global and coherent strategy by the European Union, which is what Mrs Sudre' s report has rightly proposed.
The outermost regions and the citizens who live there have high hopes for the European institutions' action in implementing Article 299(2).
Mr President, I would first like to congratulate the rapporteur, Mrs Sudre.
I think that she has done a magnificent job and also that she has shown imagination, calm and a capacity to reach agreements and compromises in order to present a document to this Parliament and to the Commission which I think can be useful and effective.
Commissioner, I think that you are perfectly aware of, and sensitive to, these issues, due to the fact that you come from a region with specific problems.
There are three regions in Europe whose citizens face specific problems: mountain, island and the outermost regions.
These citizens enjoy a positive and enriching diversity, and they demand to be given the right to enjoy the same opportunities as other citizens from continental regions.
For this they need specific treatment, which is expressed through a will for durability in the series of measures.
We cannot debate a whole series of circumstances and imagine that, once that ideal and idyllic point, let us call it, has been reached, it will no longer be necessary to adopt more measures for the treatment of these three areas and particularly of the outermost regions that we are discussing today.
We want different treatment to be maintained.
We want to continue to be an area - or areas, in this case - that requires specific treatment.
The European Union and you, Commissioner, need to be aware that this treatment is worth sustaining.
This is the message that I wanted to put across, as well as once again congratulating Mrs Sudre and all the members of the various committees, which have enabled us to get as far as this report today.
Thank you, Mr President, and thank you to each and everyone of you, ladies and gentlemen of the European Parliament, for the contribution you have made to this debate, although it is so late in the day.
I think it extremely important for the European Union as a whole, quite apart from the obvious interest it has for every man and every woman resident in our seven outermost regions.
I should like to thank you, Minister Sudre, for the quality of your report and its candour.
It is a document which my team and I feel is full of ideas and proposals, which goes to the heart of the issues and does not dodge any of the areas of concern of the peoples of the outermost communities.
In some way, here in Strasbourg you have managed to express the concerns of these remote regions - which does not happen all that often - which of course suffer from the handicaps related to their remote position and distance, compounded, for most of them, by their island nature, and other often difficult geographical or economic conditions, but these are factors which may also prove to be assets.
For I have always thought and continue to think, as you yourself have said, Mrs Sudre, that these regions can, and indeed wish to, play the role of the active frontier of the European Union at the centre of the Atlantic, next to the Americas or in the middle of the Indian Ocean.
I should next like to make one comment on your report, to say that its underlying political line is, broadly speaking, that currently adopted by the Commission.
Let me firstly outline our overall approach to the subject of the outermost regions and then discuss the work currently being undertaken by the Commission to put this approach into practice.
Regarding the Commission' s approach, as Mr Fruteau put it earlier, speaking of a process of slow maturation, if I have noted your own words correctly, the Commission was behind the policy for the outermost regions and also the various programmes - Poseidom, Poseica, Poseima (Programmes of options specific to the remote and insular nature of the French overseas departments, of the Canary Islands, and of Madeira and the Azores) - which launched this.
In this undertaking, the Commission has always been, and continues to be, supported by Parliament, both in the legislative process - ladies and gentlemen, there are at least 700 legislative acts on these regions - and in the lengthy task of grass-roots implementation.
Mr Fernández Martín, whom I must thank, quite rightly stated the results obtained thereby in practical terms.
The report we issued in March sums the situation up.
Yet, Parliament, just like the Commission, has realised that, as the Community was developing, the Community approach had to be consolidated as far as these regions were concerned.
Consequently, on the occasion of the preparations for the previous Intergovernmental Conference, they backed the negotiations which - I remember this clearly as I was the French negotiator for the Treaty of Amsterdam at the time - led to Article 299(2) being adopted.
This article, ladies and gentlemen, although it does not enable us to do everything, at least allows us to step up or action, and I believe it is necessary to expand and improve our schemes.
Let us not, however, forget that Article 299(2) also states that the coherence of the Community legal order and the unity of the internal market must not be undermined.
This, ladies and gentlemen, means that we, that is, you and I, must find a balance between complying with general regulation and adapting policy to the specific needs of the outermost regions.
We must somehow find a way to ensuring, as Mr Marques has just mentioned, equal opportunities for all citizens, but do so by finding the middle ground between the two requirements I have just mentioned, i.e. adapting policy to the regions which need it and compliance with the common rules mentioned in Article 299.
This balance, ladies and gentlemen, must be sought initially on a case-by-case basis.
Let me give one example of this.
Your report, Mrs Sudre, quite rightly stresses the need to take long-term action.
Just now Mr Ripoll y Martinez de Bedoya also stressed the importance of the long-term nature or the continuation of measure undertaken, precisely because of the long-term nature of the handicaps.
What is the situation in this respect?
A number of measures, such as the POSEI agricultural regulations have no fixed time limit.
However, in many areas, such as taxation or customs, for instance, the coherence of Community legislation and the unity of the internal market dictate that there are time limits, even if they are reasonably long, preferably with a mid-term assessment.
Ladies and gentlemen, the report we issued on 14 March 2000 outlines a strategy which will, I believe, enable the European Union to make a more effective contribution to sustainable development in these outermost regions and thereby to implement Article 299(2) in practical terms.
This coherent overall strategy should, we feel, enable the qualitative leap forward, which your report, Minster, demands. This strategy is based on three major aspects.
Support for traditional areas of production, agriculture and fisheries.
That is the first point.
Support for revival, modernisation, and the diversification of economic activities by the better coordinated and better targeted use of the Community instruments available to us.
That is the second aspect.
And finally, reinforcing cooperation with the countries located around these outermost regions, in their own geographical and political environment.
That is the third point.
But what should lead to real progress is the combination and coordination of each of these aspects, the coherence of this overall strategy.
Earlier Mrs Sudre mentioned, in a moment of concern, as it were, what she described as some kind of reluctance or hesitation on the part of the Commission.
I should like to tell her, and we know each other quite well now that I have been a Commissioner for just a little more than a year, that I have fully understood that in order to make progress and to proceed successfully - and you can count on me to support this movement - we must take things one step at a time.
Our report of 14 March was one such necessary step.
I was, moreover, given to understand that even though it did not necessarily provide immediate answers to all the problems, it did still meet with a relatively positive and constructive response in each of the outermost regions.
We needed to have this report.
I personally needed to have this report within the College of Commissioners in order to build on it and develop the next stages successfully.
I do, however, understand your comments, Mrs Sudre, as a sort of message intended to reinforce the political will of the Commission.
Indeed, when the time comes, it will be necessary, moreover, to offer the Council the same support and the same message.
Just how, ladies and gentlemen, is the Commission to implement this approach?
Generally speaking, I can inform you that work is proceeding normally.
In terms of drawing up the necessary proposals, the Commission is, obviously, working in collaboration with the Member States and regions concerned.
Although this approach and this collaborative work are constructive, we have nonetheless occasionally had to wait, and in some instances we are still waiting, for the detailed requests, and indeed the additional information required in order to adopt a position and draw up our own proposals.
In Feira, we reported back on the progress of work and we shall, of course, do the same at the European Council in Nice.
Mrs Sudre' s report mentions several of these files, and I would like to give you the actual details of the current state of progress.
In the field of agriculture, we are preparing the reform of the implementing regulations for measures under the POSEI programmes.
Our objective is, as you advocate, to improve Community support for production as well as for supply.
This is the follow-up to extensive consultation with the States and regions concerned.
We are working to ensure that these proposals can be presented this autumn.
On the subject of agriculture, permit me to address the two Members of Parliament who represent in this House a region which I have learnt to know and love, the Azores, as that is where I made my first official visit as a Commissioner.
Mr Costa Neves and Mr Casaca, you mentioned the traditional area of production in your region, milk production.
I have understood the special issue of milk quotas in the Azores.
I would like to tell you frankly that when we received notification of this current problem it was already too late to serve any useful purpose. It was not therefore included in the programme presented by the Commission in March.
The Commission is nonetheless aware of this problem for the Azores, and I can confirm, having seen it myself, that milk is virtually the only form of production there.
It is not, however, possible to increase the quote or to exempt the Azores from paying additional levies for exceeding these quotas.
Your country, Portugal, has asked the Commission to look into this matter in the light of Article 299(2).
The inquiry by our departments has not, as yet, been concluded.
That is all I had to say on this topical problem which you both, quite legitimately, pointed out.
In the field of the common fisheries policy, as Mrs Attwooll mentioned, the main initiatives will instead come during the next year. I wish to point out, nonetheless, that there is currently an extensive discussion project in progress.
As for the revival of the diversification of the economy, we have made progress in a number of key areas.
In July, the Commission adopted an important decision on the modification of the guidelines on state aid for regional purposes, it is now possible to authorise aid to compensate the costs due to the conditions of the outermost regions.
This is a significant point, and a positive one, even if this aid is not degressive or time-limited.
I feel that this is a proper response to a demand often expressed by all these regions.
Please allow me now to say a word or two as the Commissioner in charge of a significant part of the Structural Funds through regional policy.
They play a key role.
The amount allocated under Objective 1 for the outermost regions is, as you know, ladies and gentlemen, being increased for this new period, 2000-2006, to EUR 8.077 billion.
This is an increase of 70% over the previous period and, quite frankly, Mr Fruteau, since you were the one hoping and praying for practical action, here is one such.
I know it is not the only one you were expecting, the only one you need, but here is at least one action, and one which we shall, moreover, have to justify to the European Parliament and to everyone with an interest in regional development.
After a 70% increase, with EUR 8 billion, we shall have to ensure that we use the money well, and that is a challenge which is not as easy as it sounds, use it effectively for the benefit, and in the service, the people, local projects, the citizens, economic, social and human development, local democracy, use it taking into account the new regulation of the Structural Funds, i.e. in a disciplined and transparent way, ensuring genuine partnership with all those that can take part in this good management, and, naturally, respecting time limits.
This regulation on time limits, which is very strict since the general regulation following Berlin, is, of course, as applicable here as it is everywhere.
Mr Markov, in all sincerity, when I quote figures, it is quite clear that we are a long way from the reduction you seemed to fear earlier. I fully understand that when you referred to the future prospects related to enlargement - and I shall come to this later - you were referring not only to the situation for the outermost regions but also for the Objective 1 regions.
In all sincerity, right now and for the seven-year period which is just beginning, 2000-2006, we are a long way from any sort of reduction.
This significant and sizeable but necessary amount, which is justified on the grounds of the state of economic development and the unemployment-related problems in these regions, will furthermore be padded out with appropriations from the four Community initiatives, Urban, Leader, Interreg and Equal.
These considerable amounts, ladies and gentlemen, are not just the expression of our solidarity with these regions, out of fairness - I would reiterate this as it is something I believe - but are also the recognition of the key role they can and must play as outposts on - to use your own expression, Minister - the active frontiers of the European Union in the regions where they are located.
Moreover, in the next few days, I shall have the opportunity to sign, on behalf of the Commission, several regional programmes which are, or are going to be, definitively approved in the coming days: the Single Programming Document for Réunion, in the form of written procedures which have been all but completed, the SPDs for three other French overseas departments - Martinique, Guadeloupe and French Guiana.
As you know, the SPDs for Madeira and the Azores, were signed on 28 July. The only one remaining is the SPD for the Canaries which is currently being negotiated.
That is what I have to report concerning the practical implementation of regional policy programming and the considerable funds associated to these.
Ladies and gentlemen, the Commission is moreover preparing initiatives to amend some of the terms regulating the Structural Funds with a view to making them yet more effective with regard to the outermost regions by making it easier to harness Community aid for the economic operators. I know that these are long awaited initiatives.
In your speeches you mentioned your fears that the Commission was being too reluctant or too hesitant.
We feel absolutely no reluctance or hesitation.
Please believe me when I say that, in my position, I adopt an extremely constructive and open-minded approach to working with my colleagues.
It is not always an easy matter to make the practical progress in these initiatives that you expect to see.
I needed the document issued on 14 March as a basis to work on and also, ladies and gentlemen, in order to progress, and indeed make rapid progress, I now need to ensure that there is proper legal certainty.
This is not a completely obvious point which can be disregarded, even in the interpretation of Article 299(2).
This discussion will moreover continue beyond the initiatives we are going to take in the weeks to come, in the second cohesion report which, as you ask, will assess the impact of enlargement on regional disparities.
This report, which I shall be coming to present to you personally next spring will be the starting point for a major debate on future regional policy and future cohesion policy for the period 2006-2013.
In this debate, I should like to see special attention continuing to be given to the development of the outermost regions.
I have a lasting commitment to aid and support for these regions, and therefore understand, ladies and gentlemen, the concern expressed, here and there, in your regions and also in the Objective 1 regions, which I visit regularly, regarding the challenge of enlargement.
Earlier, Mr Pohjamo, you yourself mentioned this anxiety, echoing the work and the commitment of Mr Sanchez, and let me at this point ask you to convey our wishes for a speedy recovery to him, given his current health problems.
Mr Markov also raised this issue.
Enlargement is not something to be afraid of.
Overall, it is a challenge we must accept in the interests of the European Union, and its stability for the continent of Europe, peace and democracy, and even to ensure the smooth running of the internal market, giving it new opportunities.
Of course, enlargement is not something that can be achieved just any old how at any old time.
There are rules. We are working and making our own preparations, but, ladies and gentlemen, just because we are going to integrate some very poor regions in Eastern Europe into the European Union as of 2003 - and you know full well just how very impoverished they are - does not mean that, suddenly, because of enlargement, we shall think that poor regions in the West or the South, or impoverished outermost regions, have no more problems.
In these regions, as we know, there are long-term problems and I therefore believe that, objectively, in accordance with their actual level of development, they need long-term support from regional policy and special measures.
Ladies and gentlemen, now to an issue which was highlighted in particular by Mr Medina Ortega, a number of tax and customs matters are also currently being examined. Let me refer to those concerning the Canaries, the Azores and Madeira.
I should also like to mention the French system of tax on rum in the French overseas departments.
Let me assure you that the Commission is paying these issues great attention.
In all these areas, let me reiterate, I consider that a great many initiatives can be taken very quickly and tabled before the Council prior to the meeting in Nice.
This is in keeping, Mrs Sudre, with the wish expressed very recently by the President of the French Republic, the President-in-Office of the European Council and the Prime Minister of France.
The Commission is also paying great attention to a number of other issues.
I am thinking, Mr Medina Ortega, of a point you raised, the issue of transport, a point which has long been of interest to me, the matter of energy, renewable energies, energy sufficiency, and access to the various Community programmes.
Most of all, however, I would like at this point to mention one point that is particularly important to the future of these regions.
There is also the matter of the information society.
These new technologies and this information society are, ladies and gentlemen, not just a luxury for the richest regions of Europe.
Quite the opposite, I think that these new technologies, Internet access, and all the employment opportunities related to these are a great opportunity for the remote or outermost regions.
That is why I personally strove to ensure that a significant part of the Structural Funds was dedicated to the information society, and access to this information society for farmers, small- and medium-sized businesses, and young people.
The important thing now is that a good number of projects are presented under the SPDs, but also, alongside this grass-roots action, we must consider in depth the specific needs of each of the outermost regions in relation to access to the information society.
What impact could this information society have on the development of your regions, particularly in the field of e-commerce, administration, distance education, telemedicine, whose very positive and very tangible effects I saw in the Azores?
The Commission has commissioned a report on this, which we shall receive by mid 2001.
These results will be used towards a consultation debate, in partnership with national and regional authorities.
Ladies and gentlemen, the third aspect concerns the role of the regions in their own geographical areas.
We have two concerns in this respect.
The first is that their interests should, of course, be taken into account in negotiating the various trade agreements which we are called upon to sign.
We are therefore going to initiate a study of the potential impact on the outermost regions of implementing the new ACP agreement.
Then, as you yourselves advocate, we wish to stimulate cooperation between the outermost regions themselves and also between these regions and their geographical neighbours.
Let me stress the fact that the Interreg III programme, which lies within my remit, provides the necessary resources for that, since I made it my business to ensure that strand B gives real priority, and also a great deal of money, to this type of regional cooperation.
Finally, I should like to hark back to three major points raised in your report, Mrs Sudre.
The first of these questioned what our future plans were, and asked for a multiannual programme.
I should just like to explain the way the Commission sees matters.
Our March report, as I have just said, laid down the broad lines of our strategy.
We have undertaken, on this basis, to present annual action programmes, with timetables enabling us to gradually modulate our approach.
We have already commissioned the Interdepartmental Group responsible for the outermost regions, to which a number of you have already paid tribute, to draw up the first programme for the year 2001.
This group has also been assigned the task, and this is a response to another point in your report, of undertaking an ongoing examination of the various initiatives - according to one of your own recommendations - prepared by the Commission, in order to ensure that the legitimate interests of the outermost regions are taken into account across the board in all community policies.
What is more, I check that this group is doing this properly on a monthly basis.
The third point is to do with partnership between Europe, the States and the Regions.
This partnership is a valued component in the policy for the outermost regions.
It applies to practical examples, but should also enable a periodic exchange of overviews on all subjects of concern to these regions.
A partnership day was held on 23 November 1999, in which many of us participated.
It would again be possible to organise a meeting of this kind in 2001, by which time we shall have made more progress in carrying out the programme presented in March.
In conclusion - with apologies if I have spoken too long, which I probably have, but these are important issues which I feel very strongly about - I should like to reiterate the last paragraph of the conclusions of our March report in order to stress the fact that, in our opinion, the future of these regions will be determined to a great extent by the success of the strategy which we have proposed in this report, but this success will also be extremely significant for the European Union as a whole, as it will have proven its capacity to successfully take on one of the most complex challenges that exist in Europe.
That is all, ladies and gentlemen, except for one last word.
I am actively working, together with my fellow Commissioners, for the initiatives which I mentioned on the basis of the March report.
As a priority, I shall ensure that these initiatives are given shape very soon and that they, or the majority of them, can be presented in Nice.
I shall then, with your participation, if you are willing, devote my attention to conducting the dialogue on European issues - and the future and the place of the outermost regions form part of these issues.
At grass-roots level, as I started to do in the Azores, it is my intention in the coming months, as soon as the Intergovernmental Conference is over, to visit each of these regions in order to meet you, work with you, meet the civic, social, professional and political groupings and, also, as I regularly do, to discuss matters with the people of your regions.
Thank you very much, Commissioner Barnier.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.
(The sitting was closed at 12 midnight)
Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting
The Minutes of yesterday's sitting have been distributed.
Are there any comments?
Mr President, I would like my name to be added to yesterday's attendance register.
I can prove that I was also here for the roll-call vote, but I had not entered my name.
Your name will be included, Mrs Rothe.
Mr President, I wonder if this might be an appropriate time to mention an issue that arose yesterday during voting time.
It will be recalled that there was one particular vote in the plenary session on my report that was resolved by a majority of one vote.
I do not want to reopen that issue.
The Presidency declared that closed and I fully accept that.
But following that decision a whole range of Members in this House began to indicate that machines had not worked and so on.
It has occurred to me overnight that if the result of a vote is declared and there is within the Rules no provision for the issue to be reopened at all, given the alarming frequency with which a whole range of machines do not work, this could create serious difficulties.
If there were a technical difficulty and a whole block of votes in one part of this House were not counted, the outcome of the votes would call into question the whole efficacy of the decisions that we make.
I wonder whether in fact there should be some provision in the Rules for that.
I hope that you will feel that is a genuine point of order.
I remember the situation perfectly, Mr Evans. We will put the matter to the Bureau.
I will, of course, inform the President of what you have said.
Mr President, parallel to that point of order could it be also borne in mind that the interpreters are very kind to us and sometimes they do not translate "my machine failed to work" as "I failed to work".
Mr President, I rise on a matter concerning the meeting today of the College of Commissioners, under Rule 38 or 64.
I would like to request that Commissioner Lamy makes an emergency statement to this House as to why he is avoiding parliamentary scrutiny on a paper known as "everything but arms".
This has profound implications for this House, for ACP countries and for Europe as a whole.
I say profound implications because this House wants more and more democratic accountability.
This particular issue will not only affect this House, but most of the European Member States, particularly those that have such products as bananas - which are very topical - rice and sugar.
Mr Lamy should make this statement today to make sure that we do have democratic accountability.
It appears that he has no wish to discuss this issue with Parliament.
It is of great importance.
Mr President, Mr Evans has just referred to yesterday morning' s vote, specifically to the vote at which certain amendments were adopted by a majority of one.
I believe it is as well for Parliament to keep to the current Rules because, as another Member rightly said, very often it is not the machines that did not work but the Members that forgot to vote; if we were able to correct a vote after the event, we would never see the end of it.
We had a good example in the final vote on Mr Evans' report.
If I had known that the total number of abstentions and votes against was going to be greater than the number of votes in favour of Mr Evans' report, I would have asked my Group to vote against that report and it would not have been adopted.
So you can see how absurd the situation would become if a vote could be reconsidered, and I think we would be well advised to go on abiding by our Rules as they stand.
In any case, ladies and gentlemen, we will discuss the matter at the next Bureau meeting.
Mr President, I just wanted to clarify, for Mr Goebbels' benefit, that I am not raising an issue about individual Members pointing out problems in relation to just their machine or whatever.
I am concerned about the possibility of a general failure of numerous machines and rules which would then call the decisions of the House into question.
Let me also assure Mr Goebbels that I do not object to matters being decided by a majority of one.
The British Labour Government was defeated by a majority of one in 1979 and I never objected to that.
(The Minutes were approved)
Food safety
The next item is the report (A5-0272/2000) by Mr Bowis, on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Protection, on the Commission White Paper on food safety [COM(1999) 719 - C5-0136/2000 - 2000/2082(COS)].
Mr President, I beg to move the adoption of the report in my name on the White Paper on food safety. It gives me great pleasure to do so.
I should also like to refer to the 19 amendments we have before us on this report.
I accept 16 of them.
The three that I do not accept are Amendments Nos 14, 16 and 17, and I prefer 15 to 5 and 10 to 6.
As Feuerbach said: "der Mensch ist, was er isst", man is what he eats.
We are what we eat - and sadly that is true in my case.
I am clearly what I eat.
More seriously, as a result of eating badly some people suffer long-term illness and indeed some people die of food poisoning their bodies.
Over recent decades we have seen many scandals: olive oil, contaminated wine, mineral water, beef, dioxins and sludge. We have learned the new vocabulary of e-coli, salmonella and listeria and so on.
We have had scare and scandal leading to fear, panic and public enquiry.
Our constituents around Europe look to us to reassure them that the food they eat is safe and the water they drink is drinkable.
They have lost faith in the current machinery and mechanisms to control and remove risk from "farm to table", in the phrase that is so often used.
The truth is that you cannot eliminate risk.
That is not within our grasp.
Risk will always occur from animal feed and crop sprays of agriculture to the processing of food, transport, refrigeration, storage and retailing.
And then the risk goes on to our own home, our kitchens, our larders and to our cooking skills and habits in those kitchens.
If we cannot eliminate risk, we can at least take action to identify it and manage it.
New action is needed.
We must put into place a framework of legislation, guidance and good practice on food, feed, pesticides, dioxins, labelling, additives, novel foods and so on.
Alongside that framework we need a new body to restore public confidence and the respect of Member States.
My report proposes the establishment of a European Food Safety Agency which should be authoritative, independent, objective, accountable, transparent and intelligible.
Its focus must be on safety and its method must be science.
Its task is risk assessment and then giving advice on that risk management.
The Commission's task is risk management and control.
Parliament's task will be the scrutiny and monitoring of both.
We have a rapid alert system.
That needs to be improved but it can only be swiftly accountable to Parliament if it continues to be run by the Commission.
Nevertheless it should be physically and operationally close to the EFSA.
Its remit should be extended to cover feedstuffs as well as foodstuffs.
The director of the ESFA is key.
His appointment must be by the Commission, but after a hearing by the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, probably involving other committees such as the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development.
There needs to be an annual report and presentation to Parliament and risk reports coming to the Commission, Parliament and the Council.
The board needs to reflect the range of relevant experience in production, processing, retailing, consumption, law and so on.
Scientists need to give a report on assessment to the board who then makes sure that it is in terms the consumers understand, add any recommendations on risk management and submit it to the Commission and to us.
We need close working with national food safety authorities and with international bodies.
We need to see the work of the current five scientific committees and the Steering Committee subsumed within this.
It will be within a small headquarters, professionally run, accessible to the Commission and Parliament, although the site is not for now.
I thank my colleagues of all parties and all Member States.
I thank them for the constructive dialogue we have had.
I thank the Commission and its staff.
I thank the Council and the French Presidency for their messages of support.
I thank Parliament's secretariat.
We have here a proposal which can work to improve the safety of our foods, to restore the confidence of the public in our respective nations.
I hope that Parliament will endorse it.
(Applause)
, draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development.
(ES) Mr President, Commissioner, it is difficult not to agree with this document presented to us by the Commission, as it is full of good ideas and good intentions.
The rapporteur, Mr Bowis, has drawn up a superb report, which highlights the importance of an excellent, independent food authority, which would have responsibility for risk assessment, but not for risk management or crisis management, which must be the competence of the Commission, as must legislative proposals.
Both this food authority and the legislative proposals being proposed, which aim to guarantee food safety, will receive the support of this House, Commissioner.
But I would like to draw attention to a fundamental issue: the best possible legislation and an excellent, scientifically unimpeachable food authority are not enough.
We may have other food crises and, each time this happens, consumer safety will be endangered, as will the credibility of the institutions and the interests of the agricultural sector and the agri-foodstuffs industry.
And, what is more, if crisis management is inadequate, the problem uncontrollably spreads and worsens.
Food safety is not an ancillary issue: it affects public health and the stability of the food market.
I therefore ask the Commission what it plans to do in order to make the objectives of the White Paper reality.
Recent experience has shown that the series of crises is not due to a lack of scientific knowledge nor to a lack of ad hoc legislation.
The problem has been that somebody has been dishonest and has continued to be so due to inadequate controls.
Such was the case with the company that manufactured polio vaccines in the United Kingdom using bovine foetal serum, prohibited since 1999, and with the distribution via a French agri-foodstuffs distribution chain of one thousand kilos of meat from herds contaminated with BSE.
All in all, Commissioner, along with the authority, the relevant Commission services must, in collaboration and coordination with the Member States, establish a system of efficient, standardised controls throughout the food chain, and the network of food laboratories in the European Union must be improved and their work coordinated with the Commission.
I assure you that this is the best method, as it is preventative.
Mr President, the Commission proposal and the report by Mr Bowis deserve our unqualified support. Food must be safe and must be pure.
We must be certain that the carcasses of BSE cows do not end up in the food chain.
We must be able to rely on the fact that salmonella is being tackled.
But that confidence is being shattered time after time.
The more than eighty measures from the White Paper are therefore indispensable.
Setting up the European Food Safety Agency is a major step in the right direction.
Its key task is providing scientific advice, for the discussion on food safety must be pure too.
Emotions run high where food is concerned: against globalisation, large-scale production and genetic modification, and in favour of local produce, tradition and diversity.
Those emotions are often justified, but we must ensure that they do not become a cover for protectionism.
Whilst acknowledging the boom in ready-made food, we must also adopt a pro-active approach.
The new food must be of quality, the ingredients traceable, and labels must offer honest information.
Consumers deserve a choice.
The food authority must provide objective information to both consumers and decision makers.
As draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, I would like to highlight a few points.
Decision-making must be clear and transparent.
As duplication of the work and of scientific research must be avoided, we need to collaborate with national research institutes and the joint research centres.
In addition, food safety is a matter for the entire food sector, from the farmer right down to the consumer.
Sound communication between consumers, producers, the retail trade, workers and transporters is crucial.
So is attention to diversity in the SMEs.
Strict requirements and effective control are indispensable, but competition should be kept clean in the process.
Finally, my Committee argues in favour of a strategy for third countries and candidate countries.
Food safety is a global task; we should not cut ourselves off from produce from the United States or developing countries.
We must work towards a joint agenda.
I would just like to thank the rapporteur for his constructive contribution and for his willingness to take on board the recommendations from other Committees.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market has carefully considered the White Paper on food safety.
It reached conclusions similar to those of the committee responsible.
We also agree with the Commission's acknowledgement that in the interest of the public, food safety should be given particularly high priority.
The Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens' Rights accordingly made a raft of proposals which are also included in the Bowis report before us.
In view of the limited time available, I propose to cover just two key points.
First, there is no doubt that legal provisions in the field of food safety and animal feed safety need to be simplified.
We are therefore looking to the European Commission to put forward a basic legal framework.
Within this framework, the corresponding legal instruments need to be systematically put in place in such a way that health protection stands out as the most important objective.
Second, the European public are right to demand that their health be given top priority.
Furthermore, they are right to demand that they have an important say, through their Parliament, when food and animal feed safety with a view to protecting their health is at stake.
That is why the envisaged European Food Safety Agency can only have Articles 95 and 152 of the EC Treaty as its legal basis, with special attention being paid to its powers.
Mr President, let me begin by warmly congratulating the rapporteur, Mr Bowis, and let me also inform the Commissioner, David Byrne, that we appreciate the proposals he has put before us in this White Paper and the relations he has established with Parliament with a view to preparing the best possible legislation in the field of food safety for the future.
Today we are discussing a White Paper and it is useful to define a few first principles.
I think we have to be very specific about the role of the future European Food Safety Agency, which is to assess and identify risks in coordination with the existing national agencies.
We must make it clear, however, that the rapid alert system and the implementation of the measures must fall within the field of political responsibility.
That is where the European Commission, the Council and the European Parliament come into play.
The second principle is that it is important for this Agency to be highly independent and we must guarantee that independence.
It is therefore vital to allow the EFSA to act on its own initiative.
It must be independent with regard to the Member States, the European institutions and the agro-food industry.
I have tabled an amendment on levels of risk.
I have also had an opportunity to discuss this with Commissioner David Byrne.
In some cases we find that the public perceives or imagines risks where these are simply rumours, and it is our duty and responsibility to communicate with the public in order to lay these rumours to rest and restore consumer confidence.
When we are faced with a potential risk, it is important to apply the precautionary principle.
Lastly, in the event of a real risk, we must take urgent preventative measures.
To conclude, the brief of the European Food Safety Agency must be confined to food safety.
There is no question of extending it to cover product quality or labelling.
We must not confuse food risk assessment with questions of product quality.
At all events, the European Parliament and the European Commission are firmly resolved to restore consumer confidence.
Mr President, quite often a parliamentary colleague is given a report and you envy him or her.
By the time the report is presented you envy them no more.
That is not the case with Mr Bowis.
He has carried this whole debate through with considerable elegance, charm and willingness to compromise, which is why the committee was able to adopt 12 compromise amendments, supported by almost all the political groups.
We have a stark reminder this week of why we are all here and why this legislation is going through in the report in my own country - the Phillips Committee of Inquiry into the disaster, indeed scandal, of BSE.
That came about in our national herd because of negligence and the indictment against those responsible, civil servants as well as ministers, will be set out for the world to see tomorrow.
It will not be a day when we look with any particular pride at the procedures we then had.
Those procedures have now been amended and changed and we have our own Food Standards Agency.
To have such a body introduced in the European Parliament as part of a raft of similar measures, which will increase our concern and care for food safety in the European Union, is a good outcome to what has been a sad tale.
I will mention briefly the key amendments which I commend to the House and the Commissioner and which I hope we can see voted through today.
Obviously the title is important and Mr Bowis has accepted that.
This has to be called an "authority" because in English and most other languages, that conveys a body which has the power and ability from time to time in the process of risk assessment to use its best judgment and not merely to be the agent of what others would wish it to do.
One of the amendments that was passed allowed it to issue own-initiative reports.
On the still vexed question of how far we should go in allowing it to look at nutrition, and indeed to offer advice and to be consulted by those whose primary concern is risk management, we have also said that where the issue of safety is involved, these issues also should at least be within the remit of the opinion and the advice of this food standards authority.
We have also said that the national food safety agencies and the consumer bodies in the Member States of the European Union should be fully consulted in the processes we are now embarked upon.
That is because we need to carry right across the European Union the full support and weight of the public, the stakeholders and indeed, of course, the Member States for this authority.
That means that they have to accept that the rapid alert system must be improved immediately and extended to animal feed.
Yet again this week we have had another example, with infected beef in France finding its way on to the shelves of Carrefour, of how hard it is to catch those who have scant regard for food safety issues.
We want the EFSA to have a board which has a balanced representation of people in consumer affairs, public health and all possible areas of scientific and agricultural knowledge.
We want them to be people whom we can respect and who can declare their interest.
Of course many of them will have had links with the food industry, links with science elsewhere.
That is understandable and natural, but we need to know how and who and where and we should be able to do so.
We want an annual report to this House and we want the director, when he or she is appointed, to be available to the Committee on the Environment and indeed the Agriculture Committee and to this House in general to report back.
When that has happened I would say there is one last thing we must do. We must wait patiently for the Commission to come forward with legislation on other matters in the food safety area - PCB standards, food labelling, allergy labelling, action on nutrition policy and the amending legislation we need for processed baby foods and infant formulae.
These things are inextricably linked with what the food authority will be doing.
Finally, we will also be supporting a number of the new amendments, certainly Amendments Nos 11-13, 7-9 and we wish to have a free vote on Amendment No 14.
We consider some of the others superfluous, but generally speaking the broad consensus there has been throughout in this House on this report should be carried through into the vote.
Mr President, Mr Bowis has done an extraordinary job as rapporteur on this major and complicated issue.
In fact, there are a whole lot of important and, on the face of it, conflicting objectives to be achieved in this matter of food safety, including that of safety itself.
In this connection, I should like to speak up for cheap food of the kind which families with children buy and which children and young people eat.
We are also concerned with the freedom to develop food and the food sector and also with the conservation of Europe' s cultural heritage.
A central aspect of this is to ensure that the rich heritage of traditions can be preserved.
I therefore want to give my support to Amendment No 15.
I nonetheless believe that one issue has not been properly discussed, namely the need for uniform regulations to be followed up by uniform and thorough supervision.
It should not be forgotten that, viewed as a whole, the food sector is the biggest workplace in the European Union.
We must ensure that the regulations are complied with in the same way throughout the European Union.
Otherwise, we interfere both with safety and free competition in the internal market.
I should like to repeat this: ensure that the regulations are properly complied with, the length and breadth of the Union.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, "der Mensch ist, was er isst" , you are what you eat.
Those, ladies and gentlemen, were indeed the first words I spoke in my maiden speech last year with reference to the Belgian dioxin crisis.
Those are also the words with which Mr Bowis began his explanatory statement and speech in this Chamber.
This is an immediate sign that Mr Bowis and myself, along with the Environmental Committee, are largely on the same wavelength, and I thank Mr Bowis for the very constructive collaboration of the past few months.
I would like to make four observations.
The report is right to draw a distinction between risk analysis on the one hand and risk management on the other.
It is against this background that I would first of all like to say that food safety guarantees hinge on strict inspections organised by the state, and those inspections are only as strong as the weakest link.
If the weakest link breaks, the inspection process will collapse like a house of cards.
This means that all inspectorates must work together well and, often, insufficient attention is paid to the inspectorates which inspect animal medicines; this is the pharmaceutical inspectorate in my country.
I also regret, therefore, that that inspectorate will hardly be involved - if at all - in the future operation of the European Food Safety Agency.
After all, experience has taught us that ineffective inspection of animal medicines and ineffective inspection of the prescribing behaviour of vets can lead to scandals.
So I would like to flag this up as an issue.
Secondly, the Bowis report clearly states that the European Food Safety Agency is responsible for risk analysis.
We should be very aware that this agency will only be a strong partner in the Food Safety Agency safety debate once it has acquired respectability in the course of the years.
This respectability will be gained, not through laws or legislation, but through integrity, academic brilliance, neutrality, duty to be accountable, transparency and comprehensibility.
I therefore urge that, when scientific opinions are being weighed up, minority viewpoints also be published each time.
After all, science is not something static, it is ever fluid, and the debate on the six American hormones has been sufficient evidence of this.
I also welcome the farm to fork approach.
I would even go one step further and argue in favour of the seed to spoon approach.
That means that when Food Safety Agency safety is examined, all products are taken into consideration, and I would refer to Paragraph 11 of the resolution in this connection.
Fourthly, Parliament is right to highlight in Paragraph 17 that the rapid alert system must be extended to cover all food safety aspects, including animal feed. It is only right that we should call for the swift introduction of a positive list, Commissioner.
Ladies and gentlemen, this is only the beginning; we have a long way to go yet.
We must realise that consumers must regain their confidence in food and that is a fundamental human right.
I hope that in the coming months and years, we will be closely monitoring the Commission during the implementation of the White Paper.
Mr President, first of all, we too naturally support all the compromise and composite amendments jointly decided in the Committee on the Environment which, I trust, will be adopted by plenary.
However, Mr President, I should like to highlight two points here.
The subject which we are debating clearly illustrates just how superficial and empty our debate on the political unification of Europe is.
This is no paradox.
A real food safety agency will never get off the ground, unless of course it has strong political backing.
Mr President, we are talking about legislation, initially about application, we are talking about responding to danger, about measures, policy changes and comparing imports - i.e. controlling the safety of products coming in from outside.
My question is: who is going to do all this?
The national authorities?
But the crises which occurred in the past were generally covered up by the authorities in the Member State.
Need I remind you of the United Kingdom's policy on BSE?
What agency is going to be able to exercise controls, carry out investigations and propose measures on behalf of the whole of the European Union?
I, to give a minor example, would love to know what the agency now being proposed would have done about the mad cow crisis in Britain, about the dioxin crisis in Belgium and about the genetically-modified cotton and foodstuffs, such as cotton seed oil, in Greece.
Not much, I think.
Unless this agency comes up to the standards which will give it political teeth, I do not think it will achieve much.
The best case scenario is that it will work alongside the Environmental Agency, which does an excellent information job, but which freely admits that the environmental situation in Europe has not improved.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Europe is afflicted by serious public health crises at regular intervals.
These crises, such as BSE and dioxin, have become a real problem for society and lead to a loss of consumer confidence in the food they eat.
The latest events have brought that home to us again.
The Member States have risen to the situation, like France, which has set up a national food safety agency.
Today the European Commission is proposing the creation of a European Food Safety Agency, responsible for analysing all public health risks.
Sound scientific knowledge is certainly essential to help assess the risks linked to the food chain, from the farm to the table.
Any initiative to help identify these risks is therefore a move in the right direction.
But is that not approaching the problem the wrong way round?
As it often does, the Commission is proposing regulatory measures to remedy or alleviate the adverse effects of a policy for which it is frequently jointly responsible, without in any way questioning its own basic approach.
Thus, European requirements relating to traceability, which are good measures, have been made all the more necessary now that we have abandoned checks at our internal or Community borders.
Similarly, the European Union is seeking to protect biodiversity and to safeguard ecosystems with its Directives on habitat and on birds, but without questioning the emphasis on high agricultural productivity, which, after all, we know to be the main cause, together with urbanisation, of imbalances in ecosystems.
In fact it is precisely this emphasis on high productivity that exacerbates food safety risks: the specialisation of farms, most of which practice intensive farming, the need to fall in line with American market prices, and therefore to seek the lowest costs wherever possible, especially for animal feed, the transportation of animals, frequently across great distances, and the various components of the food chain from the farm to the table are all risk factors for public health, yet we prefer to cure the disease rather than prevent it occurring.
That is a serious state of affairs.
Nonetheless, under these circumstances, the European Food Safety Agency has an important part to play in conducting scientific risk analysis.
But let us make sure we leave it to the Member States to manage these risks and to apply the precautionary principle in a reasonable and proportionate manner.
That will be a guarantee of effectiveness.
Indeed, who better than the Member States to carry out adequate local checks?
Who better than the Member States to distinguish genuinely dangerous products from those deriving from our different food cultures, even when they pose no health risk at all?
Anyway, there is no such thing as a zero risk, nor is it even desirable, given that completely aseptic conditions are no guarantee of food safety.
Finally, who better than the Member States to inform the public of the risks linked to this or that product?
So let us entrust the European Food Safety Agency only with conducting scientific risk analysis, in liaison with our national agencies.
Let us require excellence and independence of it. Let us ask it to make recommendations to the political authorities responsible for risk management.
And let us not, therefore, give it responsibility for running the rapid alert system and for communication with the public.
Lastly, we must beware of standardising our food cultures.
Each of our countries, and especially France, is proud of its gastronomic culture and local products.
That is one of the areas of diversity that makes up the richness of Europe and its quality of life.
Let us guard it jealously.
Mr President, it is clear that there is considerable enthusiasm for the establishment of a European Food Safety Agency, as our rapporteur would prefer to call it.
In the UK, as in many other countries, we have now set up our own agency amidst similar enthusiasm.
It started work this year and many had high expectations of it.
However, with the advent of Mr Byrne's ambitious proposals, it would seem that this national initiative is to be absorbed into the EU structures.
In this, we are obliged to Mr Bowis.
In his report he confirms the subordinate nature of the British agency when he remarks that "It is essential that the Commission coordinates its various departments including . . . national food agencies."
As an aside, I must express my puzzlement about how a Conservative MEP can apparently embrace so easily the absorption of yet another British institution when his party stands on a platform of being opposed to further integration.
This notwithstanding, it may come as a surprise to Members that I support the concept of a pan-European approach to food safety, which is embodied in the concept of the EFSA.
Despite so often being branded as a "little Englander" by my British colleagues, I have no difficulty in acknowledging that germs know no boundaries.
However, if germs fail to respect national boundaries, they will, and of course do, fail to respect EU borders.
Thus, despite the enthusiasm for yet another EU agency, any effective control programme must look beyond the limited vision of a mere 15 states.
It must take a wider perspective.
In this we are fortunate.
Since 1984 we have had the highly effective World Health Organisation's surveillance programme for the control of food-borne infections and intoxications in Europe, based in Berlin at the Von Ostertag-Institut.
Interestingly, unlike the little Europeans who are so often behind this EU project, the WHO's concept of Europe originally embraced 32 countries, which included the former Soviet Union and has since expanded to include all countries from the Urals to the Atlantic, from Iceland to Israel.
Not only does the WHO cover Europe it also has a wider remit across the whole planet and this is important.
If one charts the progress of the main food-borne diseases which currently affect Europe, most actually made their first appearance in the Americas.
For instance, to name but one, the recent threat of E. coli O157 probably emerged in South America.
It then spread to the USA, then to Canada, thence to Australia and Japan, before significant outbreaks occurred in mainland Europe - the first one being in Germany.
As a result, many of the control initiatives which have subsequently been adopted in Europe, have originated in other countries, particularly the USA.
Risk assessment must start where the problems starts.
Therefore, if one acknowledges the need for a transnational agency to bolster the efforts of individual agencies - and indeed I do - then any such agency should not only deal with Europe: it must have a global reach taking in global information.
That is precisely what the WHO does for us: working with its regional organisations in a wholly integrated manner.
This cannot be achieved by an EU organisation.
Given that the WHO programme remains properly funded and supported, there would appear to be no need whatsoever for yet another agency, especially one with such a limited reach as the 15 Member States of the European Union.
Food safety is far too important for it to become yet another excuse for EU integration.
It displays the very worst of the European Union, because the perception is one of control freakery.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the White Paper on food safety is a long overdue response to incidents like the BSE and dioxin crises, which deeply undermined consumers' sense of security and destroyed their confidence.
I particularly want to comment on two points.
First, the creation of a network amongst Europe's research institutions is absolutely essential if we are to achieve our objective.
But we need to avoid a situation in which the future European Food Safety Agency and, for example, the Food and Veterinary Office in Dublin have overlapping responsibilities and powers.
Not only the Commission, but also every Member State must be legally able to call upon this agency.
This makes sense if the European Food Safety Agency is also to be able to operate independently of the Commission and if, whenever necessary, it is to take prompt crisis management action.
However, the conditions for appealing to the Agency must be drawn up so that efficient and swift action is guaranteed.
Second, a universal system for tracing the original ingredients of all food must be created.
This principle must be consistently adhered to when the planned review of EU legislation on food labelling is carried out.
That is the only way to regain consumers' confidence in food production, which has been destroyed.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, as rapporteur, Mr Bowis has produced an excellent report, and in many areas I would like to reinforce what he has said.
Establishing an efficient and independent European Food Safety Agency is very much to be welcomed, not least because of the various food scandals to date.
Food safety is a fundamental requirement for consumers, because they want to eat healthily, and we have to ensure that this is possible.
The Agency's central tasks will therefore be risk assessment and risk communication, an early warning system with the assistance of the five food committees all working together, excellent public relations work with consumers on food and food safety issues, and optimum networking with scientific institutions and control agencies in the Member States, so as to guarantee controls on the ground from producer to consumer.
In order to rebuild and strengthen consumer confidence, food safety and regulations need to be taken into account in legislation governing fertilisers, plant health products, medicines, the environment and waste.
Reliable risk assessment requires comprehensive analyses and reference measurements.
To make scientific results comparable across Europe, the measurement techniques applied need to be standardised and harmonised.
An appropriate infrastructure is required for testing food and in particular toxic substances in animal feed.
The Joint Research Centre's Health and Consumer Protection Institute is currently also carrying out pan-European quality and safety checks on food, and is amongst other things testing food for contamination and carrying out reference measurements for agricultural products and foodstuffs.
Substantial financial means are needed for all these measures.
It is therefore advisable also to involve and take advantage of the European Union's existing institutions, and if appropriate extend them. The funding necessary for this needs to be made available by 2002.
I have tabled an amendment on this subject, and I hope you will support it.
Mr President, the fact that only 19 amendments have been tabled in this Chamber on a subject as complex as this one, which very quickly stirs up feelings and leads to heated emotions, is a sign that excellent preparatory work has been done with the rapporteur on a basis of trust, and also involving all the other groups in the committee.
I wish to thank the rapporteur for that.
The White Paper is by no means an answer to any of the crises.
It was high time that the Commission produced the White Paper to follow the Green Paper published many years ago now.
It should also be said, as some of the previous speakers have done, and in particular Mr Whitehead and Mrs Gebhardt, that the White Paper is more than just another set of EU rules and regulations.
For example, the White Paper must ensure that conditions are created in which safe food is possible at all.
If we do not manage to modernise the early warning system and make it work, then there is little point in worrying about much else.
If we cannot manage to get the early warning system to emphasise the Member States' responsibility, then we will have a problem.
We need to apply stricter legislation, stricter guidelines and stricter criteria to animal feed.
Hygiene regulations governing animal feed production, and also regarding checks, need to be much tougher.
Without a new framework directive we will be helpless in many areas of food safety.
With this in mind, the Commission has presented some 80 proposals - either totally new or proposals for amendments - a very ambitious programme indeed.
I can see that in some areas the Commission is already active. I believe that this programme is a step in the right direction.
Of course we are all talking mainly about this new Food Safety Agency.
We agreed in committee what this new authority can and cannot do, but I would also like to remind you that food safety is important.
We already have scientific bodies in the EU which look after this.
However, if we cannot succeed in getting the Member States to actually carry out checks on the spot on the basis of the legislation, if we cannot manage to oblige them to provide information on who checks what, when and how often, then even if we created 20 new authorities in the European Union, not a jot would change as regards food safety.
We should not lose sight of that, because in that case, a new authority, whatever it was called, would just be a smokescreen and a token gesture.
Some country somewhere would then be happy to provide a home for this new authority, but otherwise nothing would happen.
The expressions that then come to mind are "everyone turns a blind eye" or "the dog barks, but the caravan moves on".
Hygiene regulations and on-the-spot checks should be the slogan of the hour.
And the ones who need to do something about this are not so much the Commission and ourselves, but rather the Member States, who so far have not done their homework.
Mr President, I feel very pleased today and grateful both towards the Commission, for having embarked upon the work on better food safety, and towards Mr Bowis and the whole of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy.
I am grateful for the constructive cooperation we have had and for the willingness to compromise that has been shown for the purpose of producing a good report.
We are now hoping for Parliament' s support, and we hope that the Council and the Commission will accept our proposals.
Together with the bureau responsible for food and veterinary issues, other scientific bodies and national authorities, the food authority must create a comprehensive system.
Just as Mrs Paulsen said, all Member States and all companies, many of which are multinational, must comply with the legislation.
If they do not, there must be a system of sanctions at EU level.
I therefore want to discuss Amendment No 16.
When food safety is threatened, both public health and the common market are placed in jeopardy.
We must consequently make such changes to the EU Treaty as to ensure that the Commission is given the option of imposing sanctions in the area of food, just as it has at present in the area of competition.
The food authority ought to be able to propose suitable measures to the Commission in this connection.
Mr President, I too have the pleasure first of all of commending the Commission for its White Paper on food safety, which is a good proposal, and Mr Bowis too for having done an excellent job of improving and fine tuning this proposal.
What is more, he has published a document containing a practical resolution, the justification for which is both humorous and easy to read.
It is not often that we read documents such as these here in Parliament.
My group shares the Commission' s and the rapporteur' s view of how the independent Food Safety Agency' s responsibilities are to be apportioned.
We believe that its main task must be that of assessing food safety risks and that its core activity must be that of providing scientific advice.
Naturally, the legislation must also be strengthened, and caution and responsibility must be the watchwords of everyone without exception, permeating the whole approach to food and enabling the entire food chain to be covered.
Food must also, as far as possible, be produced in accordance with ecological principles.
What we really need is a comprehensive strategy for dealing with food at every stage of its production.
We are concerned with issues such as GMOs, additives, labelling and so on.
I hope that the Commission will really provide for such a strategy.
My group supports most of the amendments.
I think that Amendment No 17 is particularly important, stating that the consumer organisations must be consulted.
Since recital J states that industry and food producers must be consulted, I believe that a balance is needed in this area.
Mr President, the sheer number of food scandals and the debate about using genetic engineering in food production have undermined the present food safety system.
Optimum food safety standards and falling consumer protection standards cannot be reconciled.
So something else is needed here, and I believe that too.
But I am in favour of most responsibility remaining with the Member States.
The Community is the world's largest importer and exporter of food.
This sector has an annual turnover of EUR 600 billion and employs 10 million people.
I support everyone involved, be it in a political, administrative or other capacity, who is working on a "food for all" strategy.
The developed industrialised nations are also best placed to make the greatest contribution here, through sustainable and varied food production.
The White Paper is a political paper for those in positions of responsibility in food production.
A zero-risk policy is not really practical.
That is why the preventive measures in the White Paper constitute the real action plans.
What is more, there is no European flavour here.
National peculiarities should not only be respected, but actually encouraged.
This is where the only weak points in the White Paper on food safety lie.
Certain questions remain unanswered, such as: what will the relationship be between the Food Safety Agency and consumers?
How is it to be financed and how will it cooperate with the Member States?
What about liability?
Up to now, of course, it has been the innocent parties who have paid.
The Commission will have to provide more concrete answers to these questions in its continued work.
Mr President, we value the work carried out by Mr Bowis because, in addition to placing the subject in the right context, it raises important questions to which solutions must be found in the course of time.
The usefulness of the authority to be established is undeniable, both in terms of monitoring and in terms of prevention, for which, in any case, the precautionary principle does not provide adequate practical guidance.
A reliable legislative framework, the definition of acceptable risk and the practical safeguarding of local food and production diversities are aspects which still require attention, together with those of small and medium-sized businesses and the training of their employees.
A further aspect is the organic revision of the labelling rules for both wholesale and retail selling, which will at last provide the consumer with correct information regarding products' traceability and make it possible to identify where responsibility lies in the event of risk or crises.
Moreover, it has been said, and rightly so, that the authority will not be a political body and that, particularly in the event of a problem arising, it will report to the Commission and the Member States.
How this works in practice will become clear when the authority has to act.
Its legal status, authority and interaction at European level with other technical and scientific bodies whose responsibilities currently partly overlap with the authority being established also need to be defined.
In short, it will be important to see how its independence and transparency are reconciled with the fact that no current resources have been allocated to it, with its subordination to the Commission, on the one hand, and with its authority to act autonomously and the membership of its board of directors on the other.
Lastly, the intention to identify priority actions and class them in order of importance is certainly positive.
However, while such actions are so long awaiting definition, they do not make up for the need to define a comprehensive European line on food policy and food safety, which will give the many European diversities another opportunity to display their unity.
Mr President, rapporteur Bowis started his explanatory statement on his report with a quotation from Ludwig Feuerbach, which he also repeated this morning: "der Mensch ist was er isst" (You are what you eat).
I do not share this viewpoint, for we know that a human being is more than just a body.
The fact that food safety rules have been around for a long time is evident from the Bible, as God prescribed these to His people of Israel.
However, it is appropriate to qualify the concern which people have with regard to food safety.
I would like to counterbalance the quotation from Feuerbach with one from the Lord Jesus himself: "What goes into the mouth does not make anyone unclean; it is what comes out of the mouth that makes someone unclean" , namely what we all say.
In modern society, the choice of food is enormously varied.
We mainly eat tasty food, even if we know it is unhealthy.
Strangely enough, however, there is huge panic amongst the public if something goes wrong with food production.
In order to win back their confidence, extremely drastic measures are taken, the necessity of which in terms of safety might be questioned.
Could a European Food Safety Agency have prevented a dioxin crisis and a BSE crisis?
In my view, drafting new legislation is not the right response to non-compliance with existing legislation.
The setting up of independent inspectorates in the Member States which can enforce the law on the spot should therefore be given priority.
The same applies to the rapid alert system. Member States need to ensure that this system works well and they need to inform the European Commission in good time.
Mr President, Commissioner Byrne, I would like to start by thanking our friend, John Bowis, for his excellent work on the White Paper on food safety and, in particular, for including the various amendments tabled by different political groups.
In my opinion, they enhance the original report of the Committee considerably.
The establishment of an independent, high profile European Food Safety Agency is a substantial step which satisfies the need of all the citizens for guarantees on the quality and safety of food products.
The neurodegenerative damage to man's central nervous system caused by the consumption of beef or veal - as has been mentioned this morning - from animals suffering from mad cow disease, the recent dioxins alert in Belgium, the high levels of pesticides and herbicides in the environment and the presence of other microbiological and chemical pollutants with potentially cancerous effects arouse in the public a strong sense of alarm and sometimes anxiety.
The establishment of a European Food Safety Agency will contribute greatly to achieving a high level of protection of citizens' health.
I would like to end by thanking all the political groups - the Group of the European People's Party and European Democrats, the Group of the Party of European Socialists, the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party and the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance - for accepting a joint amendment initially tabled by Mr Fiori and myself which gives greater meaning to the very existence of the European authority.
It must genuinely be a centre for coordinating the network of national agencies which, in turn, must activate and coordinate a network of centres of excellence for food safety at the level of the individual regions.
The purpose of this network of laboratories will be to monitor on a continual, daily basis, the quality and safety of food products - exactly as Mrs Roth-Behrendt said just now - and I agree with this approach.
The network must be as close to the citizens as possible and, in this way, their faith will be restored in the European national institutions.
Mr President, Parliament's vote marks the end of this first stage of consultation on food safety issues.
I just hope that it will not also mark the end of the will to intervene rapidly and effectively in a sector which affects the daily lives of the citizens so closely and which is one of the principle benchmarks of our capacity to restore their faith in politics and in the institutions.
The impetus will be all the more necessary considering that the great expectations aroused by the White Paper are not, in my opinion, truly reflected in the report tabled by Mr Bowis, despite the considerable amount of work he has put in.
Indeed, despite the fact that the creation of the European Food Safety Agency and the definition of its competencies are a fundamental point of the strategy proposed by the Commission, they are not the only point.
A European food strategy cannot be reduced merely to the creation of a monitoring authority and the application of a few - albeit necessary - health and hygiene rules.
There is an indissoluble relationship between eating healthily and eating well, a relationship of which consumers must be made more aware in order to promote quality and support the typical local products which are one of the great assets of the peoples of Europe.
With the vote in the Committee on the Environment, we have succeeded in re-establishing a certain balance, including in the scope of the resolution nutrition issues and certain significant references to the role of small and medium-sized businesses in safeguarding diverse dietary habits.
That is why I will vote for the report.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I believe that the Bowis report forms a solid basis for further work and I believe, Commissioner, that there is now not one single reason why you, so to speak, could not produce the legislative proposal tomorrow, for the large majority of Parliament is now agreed on the way forward. Mr Bowis, the fact that it is such a large majority, is partly and mainly thanks to you.
I will not dwell on the heart of the matter, since we are all agreed on that.
I would like to bring a few minor aspects to the fore.
I have tabled an amendment which is not unimportant, in my view, although Mr Whitehead suggested it was redundant.
The authority must be independent and that is why I think that 'close ties' , as stated in Paragraph 12, should actually not be allowed, not with anybody - not with consumer associations or anybody else.
I therefore believe that your Amendment No 11 and my Amendment No 17 are perfectly reconcilable.
Secondly, in addition to the authority, there are a number of important things which need to happen.
I would single out two of these: we urgently need PCB standards at European level, as well as a positive list of ingredients of animal feed.
Commissioner, I would say that there is no time to lose and, ladies and gentlemen, our role in the European Parliament is also vital for, by studying the annual report and interviewing the director of the authority, we will need to ensure that the authority works, because if it does not, if it does not do its work properly, we will end up footing the bill politically speaking.
I believe that is something which we will need to keep an eye on in the years ahead.
Mr President, I would like to thank the rapporteur for assembling the amendments of all the groups - as other members have said - in the compromise amendments.
I think he is pursuing an obvious objective which is - as he says in his document - that of guaranteeing the high levels of food safety that should exist, and a second objective that derives from the first, which is to say that of restoring credibility in the eyes of the consumer, which has been somewhat dented by scandals.
I would like to remind you of one that occurred in Spain, the rape seed oil scandal - the consequences of which are still apparent now, after more than 20 years - but also the BSE scandal, the dioxin scandal and the latest worrying scandal in the United States regarding the release, for use in food products, of transgenic sweetcorn that would seem to be unsuitable for consumption.
I believe the rapporteur's proposal to act on three levels is very important.
The first level is to create a food authority or agency, founded on the principles of integrity, transparency and independence - independence, amongst other principles, is essential.
The second is to introduce clear, accessible priority legislation, and the third is to cooperate with agencies in the other Member States, non-governmental organisations, consumer organisations and international bodies.
Therefore, as Mihail Papayannakis said, we too are going to approve and support the report.
Mr President, I would like to join with other colleagues in complimenting the rapporteur, Mr Bowis for his very constructive and very logical approach to this particular problem.
May I say, by way of a light note, that when I listened to Mr Blokland introducing some biblical quotes I felt he had elevated the status of this debate to a new plane because there were times when we thought that nothing short of divine intervention would help us resolve the matter.
However, having said that, I believe it is to the credit of this Parliament and Commissioner Byrne that food safety now dominates the European agenda.
Our citizens expect and are entitled to a vigilant and positive response.
In my view, nothing less will restore consumer confidence in an important policy area both for producers and consumers.
We have all learned our lessons from the food crisis of the 1990s.
I am confident that by putting in place a systematic set of uniform rules we are laying the groundwork for filling the gaps in the existing legislation.
This would clearly enhance food safety through the food chain.
The reform of European Union food laws would be carried out at the level of the European Union.
We want to avoid a situation where there may be a renationalisation of food purchasing within the European Union.
One of the central elements of the reform of the common agricultural policy is to avoid the renationalisation of the CAP in any shape or form.
That is why it is so important that food safety laws are enforced at European Union level.
For this reason also I welcome one of the core elements in the White Paper on food safety which would lead to the setting up of a new European Food Safety Agency.
This authority would have responsibility for scientific evidence and the communication and management of all risks relating to food safety.
Another issue which will confront us over the coming months is that of GMOs in food production and we must be open to the potential of biotechnology.
In this respect it could be a serious mistake to assume that biotechnology means poor quality or unsafe food.
For example, GMO foods offer the opportunity to reduce the levels of pesticide residues and improve nutritional quality, it would be negligent to ignore these advantages.
However, I fully support the introduction of clear, non-technical and standardised labelling in the context of GMO food products.
Moreover, no food products which are genetically modified or contain genetically modified ingredients should be allowed into the food chain until they are fully tested, and only then with clear labelling specifications.
Mr President, the fact that the White Paper on food safety has no intrinsic legislative value does not in any way detract from the dual purpose which it undoubtedly serves.
First of all, it embodies the commitment to completely and comprehensively overhaul legislation, to set up an independent Food Safety Agency and to organise inspection better.
It also has symbolic meaning.
It can and must signal the start of a new beginning.
From now on, the policy will be tackled in a coordinated and integrated manner and will embrace the entire food chain.
I welcome the fact that rapporteur Bowis, who has done sterling work, has opted for a positive approach to the White Paper.
His report does not so much propose amendments as establish emphases.
For example, it is right to stress that the food authority should first and foremost concentrate on food safety.
Nevertheless, I hope that there will also be room for collating knowledge in the field of linking food patterns to health.
After all, policy should not only focus on preventing damage to health, but also on obtaining health benefits.
A second justified emphasis is the request for consideration to be given to regional and cultural differences in the food supply and to the role of the SME and the traditional trades in question.
I would in this light urge you to recognise the specific value of the SME and traditional trades in the extensive package of legislation.
A third emphasis is required which is as yet missing from the report but which we can introduce via Amendment No 12.
Both the White Paper and the Bowis report mention communication on the one hand and procedures in emergency situations on the other, but there is no attention to the internal and external crisis communication which is so desperately needed.
It can nevertheless - and we have first-hand experience of this in Belgium - be a determining factor in managing the extent of a crisis and in whether consumer confidence in the institutions survives or not.
To conclude, let us hope that the Member States might join in the vision shared by Parliament and the Commission, and that, above all, they will assume their responsibility, not only as constituent parts of the Council, but also as a body which must ensure that inspection in the field is carried out efficiently once the European measures have been transposed in national legislation.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the White Paper on food safety has laid a firm basis for better food in future and I am also hopeful of more environmentally-friendly and people-friendly production of food.
The rapporteur, along with many MEPs in the Committee, including myself, have placed the focus on the food authority and this is regrettable to some extent.
Regrettable, because good food, safe food particularly benefits from clear legislation.
But I also understand that the many crises in Europe, and I also refer to my own country, have shown that we mainly need something to hold on to.
The policy needs an anchor so that clear choices can be made and the consumer needs to have confidence.
This is why we need this food authority and this is why we are right to set the necessary store by it.
It is important for this food authority to be able to function independently.
We have spelled this out very clearly in the report, and I am absolutely delighted about it.
It is also important for the food authority to be able to prioritise, to work pro-actively and to make recommendations to those who are responsible for risk management.
I rather regret that the title only refers to food safety.
I can understand if food safety has to be the point of departure, but surely links must be established with other areas, such as the environment, health and such like.
I hope that an energetic, future authority can get this dynamic going.
Finally, I believe that, at this moment in time, during this political discussion, we should not focus on the place of establishment.
I am quite convinced that this leaves the population completely cold.
Mr President, as the representative of the European Liberal Democrats, I would like to thank the Commission sincerely for its White Paper, with its ambitious objectives.
It is necessary to move forward swiftly and with flexibility in these matters.
This is in the interests of consumers, but also, at the same time, the food chain in Europe.
The Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy has now come to adopt a reasonable policy, as there is now the desire to create a scientific, authoritative body from the Food Safety Agency, which would have responsibility for risk assessment and keeping the public informed.
It is important that risk management itself will continue to be the responsibility of the Member States and the Commission and thus the object of political supervision also.
For us to be able to restore consumer confidence in the safety of food and maintain it, the Food Safety Agency must start its work with adequate public resources.
Self-sufficiency and the independence of the unit will serve the interests of European consumers best.
For that reason it would be best if the agency did not function under the auspices of the Commission but independently and as a body that is physically separate from the Commission.
The agency must be located somewhere well-connected in terms of transport and information technology, and the area in question should have a good reputation in the area of food safety.
Support from the surrounding scientific community will also be an important factor when choosing a location.
For that reason, I support Amendment Nos 14 and 19, which express a desire for principled guidance in deciding a future location.
The White Paper, which Mr Bowis' report broadly endorses, does not define an imperative policy, which is a great pity.
Yet, the creation of a European Food Safety Agency is a very positive step.
However, as some Members have said, we must guarantee its independence.
That means providing it with adequate financial and human resources.
For our part, we believe that a tax on agro-business profits would be a way of releasing these resources.
In order to respect the principle of transparency, we must also authorise the referral of cases to the agency by the unions and the various professional associations, in relation to both consumption and ecology.
Sound scientific risk assessment, coupled with an effective strategy of communication with the public, cannot by themselves stamp out the food crises.
That is something of a technocratic view, which makes the mistake of overlooking the cultural, social and economic dimensions of food.
We need a stronger political will to resolve certain crises.
Take the current mad cow disease crisis.
We should be able to ban the incorporation of animal meal in feed and withdraw the licence of food manufacturers who do not respect these rules.
Mr President, I congratulate John Bowis on his excellent work.
I have on many an occasion throughout this process thought that we were lucky when we chose him to draw up the report.
He has withstood the pressures he has come up against in this emotional issue extremely well.
I would also like to thank Commissioner Byrne for his cooperation.
The Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy followed Mr Bowis' s advice and decided not to adopt a position on the location of the Food Safety Agency.
In my opinion, that was a wise policy.
It is, however, important to define what we expect from the Food Safety Agency and what sort of criteria should apply in selecting its location.
In the interests of the citizens of the Union as a whole, it is to be hoped that these criteria will be implemented.
They include good reputation in the field of food safety, independence, and good scientific infrastructure incorporating the best available technology and good transport and telecommunications links.
Amendment No 19, which I together with Mr Nisticò and Mr Fiori, as well as many others, tabled on behalf of the PPE-DE Group, states these criteria clearly without taking a stand on any particular location.
These criteria will all be essential tools in realising the common aim to restore consumer confidence in European food safety as soon as possible.
In talks, there has been a call for the agency to be located in a city in which one of our Institutions is located, as, otherwise, it could not be supervised.
This sort of argument is puzzling and worrying and in fact removes the foundations on which the idea of integration is built.
I do not think we can in all seriousness say that only an authorised body that is located in the midst of the Community can reliably carry out the task it is entrusted with.
There must be other reasons for the euro' s low value than the fact that the European Central Bank is situated in Frankfurt.
I myself do not think this way and trust in the strength and basic principles of European integration throughout the EU.
Mr President, I too should like to congratulate Mr Bowis on the huge effort which he made in his report to take account of everyone's view and for agreeing that we should also refer to the more general concept of food.
The White Paper on food safety is a proposal which aspires to restore consumer confidence in the entire food chain.
Consumers are quite right to demand food which poses absolutely no threat to their health and the quality of which meets certain criteria and specifications.
Consequently, legislation on food issues should cover the entire spectrum and extend horizontally.
Allow me to highlight a number of points.
The early warning system has proven to be less than efficient and the Member States bear a great deal of the responsibility for this.
I think there should be specific deadlines by which the European Commission must be notified if there is any cause for concern.
Stricter, more efficient controls are needed in the Member States.
As far as the European Food Safety Agency is concerned, the fact that it is independent should be highlighted; then it will be able to assess any imminent risk and propose measures for managing the risk and helping to shape final political decisions.
Similarly, the Agency should ensure that there is transparency by giving all interested parties access to information.
I think that transparency and independence are the sine qua non for proper, safe food, which is what we are all aiming for.
Mr President, recent incidents which involved meat from sick cows ending up in the food chain in the Netherlands and France, as well as the debate which has flared up again in Great Britain, underline once again the need for tighter monitoring and inspection of food production.
Winning back the public' s confidence in food safety is more important than for food safety alone.
After all, this is about the confidence of the citizen in the government.
This is why the new European Food Safety Agency must become a powerful and independent body which does not only inform the public but is also given specific powers to propose effective measures in good time and to investigate problems in the event of a crisis.
We therefore have an organisation in mind which is as slim as possible, and not a large bureaucracy.
In addition, part of the body' s efficiency will consist of transparent decision-making and the swift publication on the Internet of its studies and recommendations, as happens with, for example, the Food and Veterinary Office in Dublin, which is running extremely smoothly.
The public is entitled to this.
It is also important to build on the work of existing organisations, such as EMEA and FAO, because duplication must be avoided.
Finally, the European Government should not escape its responsibility.
In the final analysis, decisions must be taken by the European Commission, and Parliament must, for example by means of a discussion on the annual report, remain involved in the work of the agency.
On a final note, President Prodi created huge expectations in the run-up to his presidency, and Commissioner Byrne and rapporteur Bowis were asked to flesh these out in their White Paper.
I believe they succeeded in this extremely well, and we shall now welcome legislation in this field as soon as possible.
Mr President, while the European food chain is one of the safest in the world, poor practice, and indeed recent scandals, have set an agenda to which our Commissioner, Mr Byrne, has responded admirably.
My compliments to him and indeed to our rapporteur, Mr Bowis, for a very logical and rational approach to the problem before us today.
The EU must have the highest possible standards of food safety for its citizens.
Food safety and public health are key political priorities.
We must be able to trust those who set out to advise us - farmers, food manufacturers, processors, retailers, government, consumer advisory groups, scientists, an endless list.
It is essential that we have a body of science as a reference point, whether we are consumers or policy-makers or even contributors to the food chain, and that we know what is an acceptable balance between risk prevention and informed consumer choice - it is all about balance.
Safety and security does not mean sacrificing choice, or indeed cultural diversity, and one of the most interesting amendments of the Committee on the Environment, which supplements and strengthens the report, is on the preservation of the European cultural heritage with regard to local food specialities.
Risks therefore need to be identified early, assessed scientifically and nipped in the bud.
European action is appropriate because in a single market risk does not stop at national borders.
The EFSA should play an important role in the existing Rapid Alert System, which should be improved and extended to cover all areas of food safety, including animal feed.
I welcome the fact that there is broad agreement on the main principles: that a new scientific body responsible for food safety risk assessment should be established, that it should be independent, accountable, transparent and subject to the needs of objective research and of commercial confidentiality and that it should provide the public with accessible and comprehensible information.
Most important of all, it should gain the respect of its peers, the confidence of the public and the willingness of Member State governments to accept its conclusions.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, the White Paper on food safety is the Commission's response to the public's increased sensitivity in this area.
The limited quantity of food we still allow ourselves must first and foremost be healthy, taste good and be produced in an environmentally sound way in consumers' eyes.
There are many aspects that need to be addressed in talking about food safety and if we want to guarantee it.
There are already very many organisations and institutions, not to mention associations and initiatives, concerned with food safety.
In the European single market, which implies free trade and movement of goods, we are increasingly faced with the issue of legislative jurisdiction and responsibility for controls in this area, which is so important for the European public.
The Commission is now proposing the creation of a European Food Safety Agency.
I welcome this proposal, but at the same time I have certain questions about the powers, remit and influence of a European authority.
These are the same questions that we considered in committee.
I would therefore like to compliment Mr Bowis on his excellent and well-balanced report, in which he has brought together a wide variety of ideas.
The Agency's responsibility should be for risk assessment. It should carry out assessments and work with bodies in the Member States.
Transparency is particularly important, and is required by the public.
They want to be kept informed.
That is why the Agency has to ensure that the public has easily accessible and understandable information.
The Agency is intended to work closely with existing institutions, but that also means that information, statistics and data should also be mutually accessible.
Other people's experience and findings can be pooled with our own, and findings can be assessed at pan-European level.
We do not want everyone reinventing the wheel.
But we can also learn from each other's experience here.
That is how I see the future role of a Food Safety Agency.
Mr President, Commissioner, I too would like to offer my congratulations to Mr Bowis as rapporteur.
We have heard various fine phrases quoted about diet. Let me offer one more: variety in moderation.
The selection found on overflowing shelves has long since made this a genuine option.
But the creation of a new authority or agency cannot change the eating habits of many members of the public, or the way we prepare and store food, or people's inadequate knowledge about preparing a balanced diet.
Making food safer does not remove the need for consumers to act responsibly.
Commissioner Byrne, it sounds to me as if we will have fewer and fewer producers but more and more inspectors.
I am worried that Europe is again in danger of creating an overblown bureaucracy that is incapable of taking action.
How exactly will the Agency's powers be divided with national inspection authorities?
I am concerned that this will be another millstone round our necks.
This new authority will not strike a blow for freedom in terms of consumer policy.
Who will be suing whom in future food scandals?
We are always discussing the division of powers in the context of enlargement of the European Union.
But this concept also plays a key role in food safety.
Strict application of the "polluter pays" principle will remain essential in repairing economic damage in future.
The consistency of the White Paper on food safety leaves something to be desired in places.
The timetable for achieving its objectives varies greatly according to the wishes of many stakeholders.
So we will not stand in the way of establishing this body any more with today's debate.
However, I do believe that we should not raise our hopes too high by imagining that this body will be a cure for all ills in future.
Mr President, my colleague Mr Bowis has played a fine hand with the cards which he has been dealt.
But I intend to ask whether those cards should have been dealt at all.
Over and over in this House we discuss the details of proposals which have been put before us but we fail to ask whether those proposals should be there at all.
We already have food safety agencies in most Member States.
We have scientific committees advising the Commission.
We have the World Health Organisation in Geneva.
What will a European Food Safety Agency add?
It will largely duplicate the activities of existing agencies.
Its main function is public relations.
It is driven by the desperate need to persuade a sceptical public that the European institutions are delivering something - anything - of value.
Would the new agency have prevented the British BSE crisis or the Belgian dioxin crisis?
As Mr Blokland rightly says, almost certainly not.
We need to recognise the law of diminishing returns.
As we create new levels of bureaucracy and spend ever more money we get less and less in return.
We are told we cannot question the value of money spent on human health.
Yet, as politicians allocating finite resources, we must ask these questions.
Would the vast cost of this new agency be better spent on cancer research or smoking prevention or road safety?
Almost certainly these areas would deliver better value in terms of lives saved, yet no one is prepared to ask the question.
I turn to the question of location for the agency.
In my view its main task should be to coordinate better the work of existing agencies.
The heads of national agencies should constitute its board.
These people should continue to sit at their own desks, in front of their own computers.
The location of the agency should therefore be not in Barcelona, Helsinki or Italy, but on the Internet, in cyberspace.
It would be efficient, transparent and accessible.
This would be a truly twenty-first century solution.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, in contrast to the previous speaker, I would like to say in the clearest terms that the White Paper on food safety before us today provides a springboard for action by the institutions of the European Union, for achieving the highest standards in food safety and for regaining consumer confidence.
After all, there are good reasons why we asked for this paper.
Of course, there have been very different approaches, as the discussions in recent months have demonstrated.
That is why the rapporteur deserves great praise, because he has managed to pull together very different approaches and ideas into a clear report.
There have even been widely conflicting views about the main point of the White Paper, the creation of a Food Safety Agency.
I will not deny that when the White Paper was published, I spoke out against the Agency.
If when it comes to the vote I - and I expect a substantial majority - argue in favour of this Agency, I would nevertheless advise the Commissioner not to be deceived.
There are many doubts and critical voices.
You should take Parliament's proposals seriously and concentrate the Agency's work on scientific tasks and risk analysis.
I particularly wish to stress that the Agency and the present system of advisory committees cannot exist side by side.
There must be clear arrangements governing the Agency's cooperation with the Joint Research Centre in Ispra and the Food and Veterinary Office in Dublin.
You must prevent several institutions carrying out similar work in parallel.
As regards the actual structure of the Agency, it must be clear how it is to be financed.
We in Parliament welcome and wish to encourage a financing plan.
What staff numbers are required?
What is an appropriate timetable for setting up an authority of this kind?
You should also use the White Paper to enforce strict rules in the Member States.
If the proposals for over 80 legislative measures are much the same as the hygiene rules I have now received as rapporteur, then I am very optimistic.
However, Commissioner, when it comes to the provisions on labelling, please think again about your ideas ...
(The President cut the speaker off)
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to congratulate Mr Bowis on his excellent work.
I must say, among other things, that we have recouped an extremely important aspect, the concept of a European Food Safety Agency as a network that should complement rather than replace the food safety bodies of the individual Member States.
However, it is also necessary to call for a balanced approach to the issue because Articles 152 and 153 of the Treaty on European Union provide, as a general rule, for a high level of protection of human health and of consumers.
The priority of absolute concern for humans is based on these principles.
We must therefore ensure that the European Union has the highest possible food safety standards, but in taking this approach - which we unanimously uphold - we must also analyse the economic implications for the sectors involved in production.
Article 2 of the Treaty states that the Union is committed to promoting the harmonious, balanced, sustainable development of economic activities.
Therefore, any legislative measure concerning a sector such as the food sector, which is one of the driving forces of European industry - accounting for 15% of the total output of the manufacturing sector and employing 2.5 million workers - must be evaluated on the basis of this twin consideration, since both principles are intended to guarantee the general well-being of the Community.
Any consumer protection operation only becomes feasible in terms of profit when it avoids unduly damaging the general economic well-being of the Community through placing disproportionate barriers in the way of the sector's production processes and therefore hampering economic growth and growth in employment.
I therefore call upon the Commissioner to avoid excessive legislation and bureaucratic burdens as far as possible, particularly where small and medium-sized businesses are concerned.
Mr President, developing an independent European Food Safety Agency is a major objective which must be achieved in conjunction with the national structures responsible for monitoring.
We must, however, ensure that in the wake of the debate on the White Paper, the fear of a bureaucratic Europe which concerns itself with the quality of products without doing anything effective to combat fraud that threatens the health of the consumer is not reinforced in the mind of the public.
I, too, congratulate Mr Bowis on his report and I would just like to highlight one point.
A strategy which covers the entire food chain, from farming to production and distribution, could facilitate further economic concentration to the detriment of smaller companies and companies producing typical products, without creating any real advantage for the consumers.
Small companies producing typical products are the jewel of many European regions.
The objective of food safety can and must fit in with this grass-roots situation which, as a large number of Members have stressed, is of cultural as well as economic value.
Mr President, I would like to extend my genuine congratulations to Mr Bowis on his sound report on the White Paper for food safety.
It is a very loaded topic which, after the European food crisis, has led to heated debates, and Mr Bowis managed very well to incorporate this debate in his report.
In the Netherlands, the debate has focused on a European Food Safety Agency, which could be seen as Europe' s answer to the American FDA.
In fact, that is how it was launched by the President of the Commission, Mr Prodi, when he took up office.
The White Paper which is now before us and the Bowis report both take an agency as their only starting point, an agency attended by an extensive package of tasks in the form of accompanying legislative measures designed to restore confidence.
Upon careful examination of the White Paper in the Member States and here in Parliament, it will then be given legislative status in the form of a new draft directive.
The tasks will then involve independent scientific research, advice, independent inspections and a rapid alert system, but definitely coordination too, in order to restore confidence.
I have concerns regarding those independent inspections.
Why?
In my view, there should be better guarantees for coordination with Dublin, and it should also be possible to carry out inspections in the Member States without prior permission.
Amendments have been tabled to that effect.
Legislation, standards and laying down rules remain within the remit of those institutions authorised for those purposes in Europe. Those are the Commission, as initiator, and the Council and Parliament as legislator.
That does not take away the fact that I am left with one huge wish.
I would have liked so very much to have drawn a comparison with the EMEA, and I also wanted to include notification and product approval as part of an agency' s remit.
I hope that this will be given due consideration in the new proposal.
First of all I would like to express my thanks to the many Members who have contributed to this report.
As you are aware, the Commission attaches the highest priority to its strategy on food safety.
I must give special thanks to the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy and its rapporteur, John Bowis, for producing this opinion with such a degree of consensus and pay particular tribute to him and to the other Members of this House who have taken the time to discuss these issues with me and with my officials.
The consequence is that we have achieved this excellent measure of consensus which is yet another notable example of the cooperation that can exist between our two great institutions.
The Commission's White Paper on food safety sets out a major and ambitious programme of legislative reforms to complete the EU's farm to table policy.
Taken together with our proposals to establish a European Food Safety Agency, the programme will make a major contribution to the health protection of our citizens as well as to the restoration and maintenance of consumer confidence in food safety.
European consumers have every right to expect the highest achievable food safety standards and our ambition is to develop systems that deliver this.
A food safety chain from farm to fork, correctly regulated and effectively controlled, is the road to building high levels of confidence in the European food supply.
In this respect the Commission is already hard at work on its programme of legislative reform set out in the White Paper.
Several proposals are already before the Council and Parliament: for example, the package of proposals recasting and updating the hygiene legislation.
As an aside, I can say of the speakers who referred to the need for sensitivity in relation to the promotion of local food specialities and traditional foods that this issue is addressed in the hygiene legislation.
We are also working on a number of major reforms in the systems of control implemented by the competent authorities in the Member States and at Community level.
In this regard, the Commission will adopt proposals for a revised control regime in the period ahead.
The White Paper reiterates the Commission's commitment to basing its proposals for consumer health protection measures on sound science.
Indeed, the food authority is conceived as a point of scientific excellence at the service of the Community in its broadest sense: consumers, the institutions and Member States alike.
The food authority will also need to be visible to the general public and be the authoritative voice in matters relating to the scientific aspects of food safety in Europe.
The Commission intends to adopt a proposal for a regulation establishing the overarching principles and objectives of food law, which will provide the framework for future health protection measures relating to food.
This proposal will put forward the establishment of a European Food Safety Agency which will provide the Community with advice on scientific and technical issues and thereby enable the Commission to give effect to the general principles of food law.
Our intention is to adopt this proposal in the Commission on 8 November 2000.
This schedule continues to reflect the importance the Commission attaches to the matter and is broadly in line with the timescale set out in the White Paper which envisages that the establishing legislation will be enacted in 2001, leading to the establishment of the food authority in 2002.
I only wish we could do better in terms of time.
I know, Mr President, that you share my views in this regard.
I look forward to the fullest support from Parliament in dealing with this most important piece of legislation in the shortest possible timeframe.
I have followed Parliament's debate on the White Paper with great interest.
I am encouraged to note the high degree of agreement between Parliament's views as expressed in the draft report that you have debated, and the White Paper itself.
This will facilitate the Commission's task in bringing forward a balanced proposal that takes maximum account of the views of Parliament and the many stakeholders in the area of food safety.
You will appreciate that I cannot promise to take on board all your views, but my record before this Parliament will demonstrate that I will do my utmost.
I have previously acknowledged in Parliament and other forums what I regard as an important issue for the fullest acceptance of our ideas for a food authority: the role and involvement of Parliament itself in enacting the legislation establishing the food authority.
I would like to put it on the record today that I remain committed to Parliament having a full codecision role in the enactment of this legislation.
It is right and proper and I support Parliament's desire to see Articles 95 and 152 of the Treaty employed to this effect.
In conclusion, I would like to express my appreciation to you, Mr President, your rapporteur, Mr Bowis, the shadow rapporteurs, the Committee on the Environment and the other committees who have contributed, and the House as a whole for bringing to a close this chapter in our collective endeavours towards improving Europe's food safety regime.
Thank you very much, Commissioner.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place today at 12 noon.
Anti-personnel mines
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, this is not the first time that Parliament has tackled the issue of anti-personnel landmines.
Far from it. In recent years, this issue was one of the driving forces which led to the signing of the Ottawa Convention.
A campaign was initiated by certain non-governmental organisations and then taken up by the Red Cross, Europe and the Union as such, and it turned into something approaching a model international campaign.
This was one of the most rapid agreements to be signed in the history of international agreements: it is the only agreement to have been ratified within a year by forty parliaments, thus becoming operative.
The most recent meeting in Geneva noted considerable progress in the area of de-mining as well as awareness of the issue.
Certainly, much remains to be done, and this is why we must all welcome the Commission's proposal as a positive step.
Moreover, I hope that this capacity to exert pressure and the speed with which the Union tackled the issue of anti-personnel landmines might serve as an example for the ratification of other agreements which have always been extremely important to Parliament, such as the establishment of the International Tribunal for Crimes Against Humanity, not to mention the moratorium on the use of the death penalty.
Turning to our report, I welcome the Commission's proposal as positive, and I have to say that the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Security and Defence Policy and the Committee on Development and Cooperation have worked extremely hard in order to improve it - if this was possible - on certain points in particular.
I would just like to mention a few of these points which, with regard to Parliament's proposal, seem important and, in any case, represent a tangible step forward in this matter.
Firstly - and we hope that Parliament will support us in this - we stress the need to destroy the stockpiles of anti-personnel landmines still held by many countries, including signatory countries, because we feel that Parliament often talks about stockpile destruction as preventative action without really knowing what it is referring to.
The second point has to do with a whole series of elements - which I hope Parliament will approve - regarding budget lines.
Commissioner, in addition to further simplifying your proposal - thereby arriving at three budget lines: one general, one relating to research and one relating to humanitarian landmine clearance - we have further simplified the proposed comitology, and we hope that Parliament will approve this, considering that an advisory committee will suffice instead of a management committee, for the very reason that, in the interests of coherent interpretation, we feel that the Commission is responsible for implementing the budget and must account for it with total transparency.
Another important element is that Parliament is not asking for anything general but requests EUR 200 million over the period 2000-2006, plus the funds to be allocated to research, plus the humanitarian heading, for we are indeed - we hope - talking about action and not just a resolution.
Experience has taught me, Commissioner, that without funds it is difficult to achieve anything tangible from any point of view.
Moreover, precisely because the sum is so large - EUR 200 million - a considerable increase on past provision - we would like the Commission to establish an internal unit for anti-personnel landmine action, precisely in order to increase the transparency and cohesion of this activity.
From this perspective, these seem to me to be the characteristic elements facilitating responsible management and transparency.
We will come to the political side of the report later.
The final point concerns the amendments.
I restate my position opposing Amendments Nos 10 and 19, in the interests of budgetary cohesion and, with regard to Amendment No 29, I call for split voting in order to improve the formulation throughout the text, for I feel that it has suffered from some misinterpretation.
I would like to thank you, Mr President, Commissioner, and the hope that all these innovative proposals will not only be adopted by Parliament but also taken into consideration by the Council and the Commission.
Mr President, even in common parlance the word 'mine' indicates danger, and if an Italian describes someone as 'una mina' they are calling that person a loose canon.
The European Union must be united in its action and ensure that the production of landmines is stopped, that all stockpiles are destroyed and that the ground is cleared of mines, and that assistance and means of social and economic inclusion is provided for their victims, who include many children, while safeguarding the development of the community affected.
In this sense, there must be a sharp focus on the issue and actions must be undertaken to further raise awareness in order to prevent the matter fading into obscurity.
Both the report and the opinions of the Committees, which we are presenting today, stress the driving role played by Parliament and the European Union in the abolition of landmines and in the provision of financial aid to the UN.
As Mrs Bonino said, very clearly and explicitly, the Commission's proposal for a regulation is a further step forward.
We have tabled several amendments intended to achieve greater clarity and transparency and to consolidate and rationalise the budget lines and our endeavours in the areas of mine clearance and stockpile destruction.
These endeavours are carried out in conjunction with many NGOs, to whom all credit is due for convincing people that it is impossible to defer the issue any more.
The Union does, however, have a weak point - a number of weak points - namely that we need to put pressure on Finland, which has not yet signed the Ottawa Convention, and on Greece, which has not ratified it, or Europe will lack credibility when it promotes the adherence of all countries to the Convention and raises the question - which we have also raised in the oral question which we are going to put to the Commission - of whether the candidate countries have to sign the Ottawa Convention before they become Members of the Union.
The Unmine Monitor report for 2000 clearly shows the progress achieved through the Ottawa Convention.
There has certainly been a reduction on a world-wide scale in terms of production and trade and stockpiles etc., with a fall in the number of victims, although the figures are still too high.
A great many issues remain unresolved, especially since countries such as the United States have not yet signed the Convention and countries such as China and Russia hold enormous stockpiles.
Europe must find a way to ensure that these stockpiles are eliminated from history but linger in our memories as a reminder that we must stop killing people with our lethal products.
Mr President, we are all aware - in fact this has just been mentioned by Mrs Bonino and Mrs Morgantini - of how tragic the results of the use of anti-personnel landmines are and how serious the problem is given the large number of landmines that remain in place and primed on the ground.
Some say there are 70 to 100 million of them.
Hence the importance and timeliness of the Ottawa Convention, under which the international community is to take concerted action to put an end to this tragedy, which affects the poorest countries most of all.
Difficulties do remain, because certain major countries - which have already been mentioned - have not yet signed the Convention.
In this respect we can only regret the fact that one Member State, Finland, has not yet signed and another, Greece, has not yet proceeded to ratification, as Mrs Morgantini has just pointed out.
This raises the first question: the need for the European Union, especially the Commission, to do everything possible to encourage non-signatory countries to sign the Ottawa Convention.
It would be desirable if the Commission could tell us what it intends to do in this area, particularly with regard to the countries applying to join the European Union.
But of course its authority in this field will be greater if the Council and the Member States explicitly state that the European Union will under no circumstances in its external relations use anti-personnel landmines or help in their use.
It is, however, essential to ensure the greatest coherence and coordination between the actions taken by the European Union and those taken by the Member States.
In this field, too, the Commission can and should play an invaluable role, and it should tell us what it proposes to do in future in this context.
The Community actions to be taken in this field must also benefit from adequate budgetary support if they are to be as effective as possible.
The Commission' s draft regulation seems too vague.
We are firmly in favour of setting up a single budget line for action against landmines, except for research and food aid, and I believe it would be beneficial at the same time to set up a central unit coordinating all actions in this field, as mentioned by Mrs Bonino.
As for the actions to take, it is essential to guarantee that existing landmines - the enormous landmine stockpiles - will be destroyed so as to prevent them from finding their way onto the black market.
It is equally essential to put an end to their production.
Other mine-clearance or victim-support actions will be of little use if we continue to produce and trade in landmines.
We must act first in the area of prevention.
Afterwards we must invest more in research, especially research into the detection of mines placed in the ground.
Lastly, it is crucial that we reinforce mine-clearance action by ensuring the effectiveness of the actions taken and by giving priority to the countries that respect the Convention, just as it is also essential that we guarantee victim rehabilitation measures.
I would also like the Commission to explain in greater detail what it intends to do in these fields, bearing in mind past experience and the important role that the European Union has taken on in this area.
The field of action is, of course, vast and requires funding and great political will.
The challenge is enormous, but the extent of this tragedy demands that we make an enormous effort and commitment to put an end to this situation.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, we all know what the consequences of anti-personnel mines are, even if there may often be important military justifications for them in individual cases.
They result in immeasurable suffering, especially among civilians and children.
But they also often destroy countries' long-term development potential by contaminating entire regions.
For this reason it is extremely positive that the Commission and the European Union are tackling this subject as a whole and wish to ensure that a coordinated policy is adopted in this area.
Our question to the Commission is intended to encourage it to continue down this path and to strengthen this initiative still further.
I say this because we do indeed need coordination between the efforts of Europe and other international players, areas benefiting from development funds or actions directly administered by the Commission.
Proper mine-clearance equipment therefore needs to be arranged and we need to finance research work on detection and clearance, and on equipment that is simple to use on the ground, which is particularly helpful for developing countries.
There is also great potential for coordination in relation to personnel deployment, by which I mean both military personnel and civilians.
My committee also suggests that you should consider seeking special deployment arrangements in cooperation with Eurocorps, making it possible for Europe to take the lead here.
We also certainly need to designate priority areas for mine clearance so as to create special focal points.
Not all countries have yet signed the international conventions, nor have they been ratified by all countries, for a wide variety of reasons.
I believe that we therefore need to wage a campaign to make those in positions of political responsibility weigh up what the military benefit of mines is and what the consequences are for the people and the region.
By weighing things up in this way they will realise that arms of this kind should no longer be used and that we should help these countries to find political alternatives to using such mines.
I also believe that there must be a proper political framework in these regions so as to give such governments the political power to escape from this vicious circle, which means that, ostensibly, in trying to provide protection for themselves they ultimately harm their own population in the long term.
I must therefore encourage the Commission to regard this not just as a technical starting point for providing some kind of financial support, but also as an important opportunity to create a political framework with a view to securing an improvement here.
I should like to express my appreciation for the ambitious and constructive attitude of Parliament which is clearly reflected in the report by Mrs Bonino on the draft regulation, reinforcing the European Union's contribution to the fight against anti-personnel landmines.
It is no surprise that a report by Mrs Bonino is such a powerful and important document.
I am grateful but not surprised by the tone of the report.
After all, the European Parliament took the lead in the Union in the fight against landmines.
It was Parliament which first raised, in 1996, the issue of a horizontal budget line and of a proper legal base to provide a single platform for the wide range of actions that we undertake in this important field.
Parliament was instrumental in galvanising the Union into taking a proactive role at the Ottawa Conference in 1997, which led to the conclusion of the Convention to ban and eradicate landmines.
It is the challenge of implementing that Convention to the full which led the Commission to reflect on how to reinforce the contribution of the European Union to the battle against landmines.
The result of that reflection is before you in the form of a proposal for a regulation.
I should also like to mention the key role played by civil society, by highly motivated non-governmental organisations and, in particular, by the international campaign to ban landmines.
Their efforts are essential for the successful implementation of the Convention and their pressure on governments around the world has contributed tremendously to the encouraging record of ratification and accession.
Over the last eight years we have contributed over EUR 200 million from the Community budget to the fight against landmines.
In 1999 alone the Union spent more than EUR 100 million of which EUR 30 million was for Community projects, far more than any other international player.
Some Members of the House may have seen the brochure that we prepared for the Ottawa Convention review conference last month, which shows the breadth of the interventions that we are making, covering every corner of the world and every aspect of mine action.
I particularly commend the work of the Joint Research Centre.
Being the largest contributor to this cause is not enough.
The objective of the draft regulation is to allow us to define a strategic, overall approach and to measure our efforts against well-defined targets on the road to our common final objective of a world free of landmines.
Before I comment on the excellent report before us on the draft regulation I should like to make a few general remarks in reply to the interesting and valuable speeches made by Mr Miranda and Mr Brok.
Of course we share the objective of universalisation of the Ottawa Convention.
The European Union has a clear position, set out in the 1997 joint action on extending signature and ratification of the Ottawa Convention to as many countries as possible.
But I cannot hide this fact: the Union's powers of persuasion in seeking to achieve this goal are obviously somewhat limited by the remaining difficulties of some Member States in signing and ratifying the Convention.
This is, to follow the speech of the honourable Member, a point which we put with some regularity to those Member States.
Clearly, the granting of European Union mine-action support can work as an important lever to get potential beneficiary countries to sign up to the Convention.
The communication and the draft regulation provide for a degree of conditionality in this respect, but we should not be too dogmatic.
We have to acknowledge the specific situation in certain countries.
We should not penalise people who need our help, even if their governments are not yet sufficiently committed to the implementation of the Convention.
It is the usual dilemma that we face.
It is a dilemma which the honourable Member has expressed with considerable eloquence in the past: the challenge we have again and again of providing humanitarian assistance is people where the humanitarian assistance is very often needed as a result of the actions of their governments.
But we cannot penalise people when they have a lousy government.
As for the applicant countries, we would expect them to support the joint action which I have just referred to.
This is not Community acquis in the strict legal sense of that term, but we will obviously encourage them to do away with mines in their defence, to stop manufacturing mines or trading in them, and to sign and ratify the Mine Ban Treaty.
If I may again follow a point Mr Miranda made earlier, I am particularly keen that we should also look at projects to destroy the existing stockpiles of landmines.
It can be difficult environmentally and it is expensive but we should give that some priority in the future.
I should like to draw Parliament's attention to the Slovenia International Trust Fund which, in only two years of operation, has set up a regional mine-action programme with support from the European Union, the United States and a number of other countries, with projects throughout the Balkans.
After the events earlier this year in Zaghreb and the more recent events in Belgrade, we must hope that the future of south-east Europe is free of the setting of landmines.
Enhancing coherence between Community and Member States' action, to which the honourable Member referred, is at the very heart of the communication which accompanies the draft regulation.
We have adopted a flexible, coordinating approach rather than a rigid, centralising one.
Mine action is most effective when it is tailored to the conditions which are specific to each situation.
That is why we do not propose to pool all mine action, even within the Community framework, in a single programme and a single budget line.
Instead, we are proposing to set up an expert group with participation from Member States, from non-governmental organisations and from the other relevant players.
The intention is that this group should assist the Commission in drawing up an overall strategy for mine actions.
Turning now specifically to the Bonino report, I would like to comment briefly on the very few amendments by Parliament which the Commission has some difficulty in taking on board in their current form.
Some of them I have already touched on in my reply to the honourable Member.
Firstly, as I have already mentioned, I think it would be a mistake, well-intentioned but nevertheless counter-productive, to make accession to the Ottawa Convention a hard and fast condition for European mine-action assistance.
It goes without saying that we will only rarely agree to give assistance to countries which have not signed up to the Convention.
But there are bound to be cases where, for political or humanitarian reasons, we wish to assist populations, despite their governments.
So I would argue against Amendment No 18.
While I understand and respect the ambition behind the proposal to concentrate all funds for mine action under the horizontal budget line, with the exception of ECHO and research lines, I am not convinced that this gives us the necessary flexibility to maximise the effectiveness of European Union interventions.
It may be that over time the horizontal line will attract more attention and more appreciation, but we also need to maintain the link to broader national or regional programming through the geographic budget lines and regulations.
I myself would say no to proposed Amendments Nos 3, 16 and 21.
For the same reason I am confident that the human and administrative resources requested for the central mine action policy team are sufficient to guarantee the proper implementation of the regulation.
We do not want to add new layers to our bureaucracy; a small team and proper networking can achieve the same results.
I would propose to say no to Amendment No 17.
Similarly, we do not want to create another committee, be it management or advisory.
Parliament knows that there are far too many of them already and as the House knows, under our proposals for the reform of EC external assistance, we hope to move away from the heavy handed scrutiny of individual projects and instead focus our discussion with Member States on overall strategies and programming.
It is what we are agreeing to do on MEDA, for example.
This will be done in the various existing geographic committees.
Instead of adding another one to the list, we propose the creation of an expert group which will give us a forum going beyond government experts where we can discuss and where we can define overall mine-action strategy to be applied horizontally and to be reviewed every year.
Therefore the Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 8, 22, 23, 25 and 29.
Finally, on the contracting of mine-action projects, I would caution against the introduction of stricter limitations to the participation in our tenders.
As well as pursuing local capacity-building and ownership, we must be able to draw on the best existing expertise and material wherever it is available.
In most cases that will be within the European Union, but we may exceptionally have to turn elsewhere.
I cannot accept Amendment No 19.
I will not go through all the many amendments proposed by the honourable Member, which the Commission can readily accept and which will in my judgment significantly improve the draft regulation.
These only confirm the sense of purpose and ambition which we all share.
We have a lot of work still to do if we are to achieve the objectives of the Ottawa Convention to eradicate these mines within the next decade.
The adoption of this regulation constitutes a small, but in my judgment an important step along that road.
I hope that we can rely on the continued support of Parliament for the successful outcome of the legislative process.
Mr President, some of us have been involved for many years in trying to overcome the scourge of anti-personnel landmines.
It is an issue that has caught the public imagination in many of our countries.
Governments have expressed their commitment and pledged large sums of money.
NGOs have sprouted up in response to the need and yet, some four years after the first United Nation's landmine conference in Geneva and over a year after the entry into force of the Ottawa Convention, we must recognise that many countries and thousands of people, usually in the poorest regions of the world, are still terribly afflicted by anti-personnel landmines and unexploded munitions.
Why is progress so slow?
It seems to me that the problems are threefold.
Firstly, we need to be focused in our aims.
The anti-personnel landmine campaign should not be used as an opportunity to attack western governments, particularly the United States, western military establishments, or western industry.
For the most part, western governments are not the problem but part of the solution.
We should concentrate our political attention on the real culprits: warring factions and irresponsible governments who have shown no concern about civil populations and who use anti-personnel landmines as indiscriminate weapons of terror.
More importantly, practical mine action should focus on the priorities: making areas safe where the suspected presence of mines is a bar to resumption of normal life and economic development, and assistance to mine victims.
Secondly, the international community needs to improve the coordination of its efforts both at the global level and particularly within the afflicted countries.
The fact is we still do not know the true extent of landmine infestation and we do not know how effective efforts to clear mines have been.
A rapid stocktaking exercise needs to be conducted in each of the most afflicted countries so that we can see more clearly what needs to be done.
Thirdly, we need to ensure that money is spent well.
I take some pride in the fact that the European Commission is the world's largest supporter of mine action.
This is an area where, in view of the European Union's capacity for coordination of efforts by many countries, an application of large resources to the problem should be more effective.
There are many reasons why the rhetoric has not been matched by reality.
In a way, the landmine case characterises the wider failure of the Commission to make effective use of the resources at its disposal.
The Commissioner for external relations has previously recognised that the Commission's external aid programmes have been an embarrassment.
The Commission needs to improve both the quality of its programmes and their speed of implementation.
Things are beginning to move in the right direction under Mr Patten's leadership.
The Commission communication and the regulation on anti-personnel landmines are very useful documents, but they omit two key elements, which Parliament's amendments seek to correct.
Multiannual funding for mine action must be concentrated on a single budget line and there must be a properly resourced unit within the Commission, specifically responsible not just for the policy framework but also for the planning and implementation of mine action, including contracts.
Top-level commitment, proper direction and management with responsibility are the keys to the effective use of resources.
Let us have no more gestures but real action and tangible results.
Mr President, the Group of the Party of European Socialists shares the pride which Mr van Orden expressed a moment ago in the role of the European Union.
A number of years ago, I visited a school class in Kabul, Afghanistan, and witnessed how children were told about the different types of landmines.
And when I saw one of those landmines in the shape of a butterfly, I realised that landmines are designed so that children will play with them and get hurt, and it also gave me an insight into the moral value of those who manufacture this kind of product.
I also saw then that the awareness campaigns in schools as well as amongst the population are the most effective tool to prevent victims.
A substantial proportion of money should be earmarked for this. On behalf of my group, I welcome the relevant amendments with open arms.
Secondly, it is obvious that we are often fighting a running battle, for while these mines were being cleared in Afghanistan by all kinds of associations, others were being re-laid elsewhere.
And I am also casting my mind back to northern Mozambique, where I worked alongside organisations of handicapped people, injured by landmines, who got involved in the clearance and removal activities.
This taught me two things.
First, you have to involve the local population.
People, even if they are injured, can manage a variety of things themselves.
Second, I understood that the main aim of landmines is not to kill but to maim, and this makes this moral issue so loaded.
When I arrived in Angola, I saw the Norwegian People' s Aid, and they used a method by which, together with the local population, they traced where the mines were and cleared certain areas very strategically.
I took two things away from that experience: you need the experts, in this case the old soldiers of the Norwegian People's Aid and the local population - a crucial component - and you then need to clear the mines strategically.
The toothbrush methods, which are extremely expensive and time-consuming, are not always appropriate. It is better to clear strategic regions, so that new life can be breathed into the local economy, etc.
This got me onto the idea of not working with the national Angolan authority or via complex structures in the first instance, but of simply working with the authorities through strong NGOs among the local population in a well-organised manner, as is being attempted in Angola.
At the same time, one realises that new landmines are being laid in Angola, and this brings me to the point which Mr Patten highlighted.
Commissioner, you said that you were against a number of amendments.
I believe, however, that if you were to study them again with more care, you would find that there are a few amendments you quoted which, in my view, concern the awareness campaigns, transparency, access for NGOs, as well as things which are going well at the moment but which could run more efficiently.
I believe that you need not be afraid of the amendments tabled by Parliament in this respect.
We do not want more bureaucracy or comitology; instead we want to create more room for you, we want things to be done efficiently, and I believe that our priorities in this respect are not a million miles apart.
You may want to re-read a few paragraphs to see if all these points are really ripe for the bin, which is not so easy to admit for an English person.
I believe that, as far as that is concerned, you and Parliament are on the same side.
The Socialist Group feels part of this massive international anti-landmine campaign and we, together with other MEPs here, are proud of this.
Mr President, anti-personnel mines are abominable beyond belief. Their purpose is not to kill but to disable and cause the worst possible pain and distress for the victims, their families and their countries.
Think of the Soviet 'toy' bombs in Afghanistan.
They are, unfortunately, incredibly cheap to produce and wildly expensive to find and destroy.
It will take a hundred years to have them removed, and more and more of them are being scattered.
It was the Liberal, Jan Willem Bertens who raised the matter five years ago in Parliament, and I think this Parliament can really pride itself on having set the ball in motion so that we are now on the way towards a ban on mines.
We can also point to the very major and effective contribution the European Union is making on this issue.
More still can be done, however.
There are machines which can clear large areas of mines in a short period of time.
I have seen such a machine in Kosovo, but it was idle and not in use.
Mrs Bonino and Mr Patten are right in saying that it makes obvious sense to destroy the stockpiles, because the cost of destroying a stockpiled mine is only a hundredth of that of destroying one which has been transported to a place where it is difficult to find.
Mrs Bonino and Mr Patten are also right to say that Parliament and the Council should not interfere with the administration, and I listened carefully to Mr Patten' s remarks on this point for he obviously thinks we should interfere still less.
I agree in principle.
We should refrain from getting involved in the administration. We should instead criticise the Commission if it does not engage in proper administration.
We should not, however, be controlling the Commission from a distance.
That is a mistake this Parliament is constantly making.
The Commission must have the freedom to exercise its powers, and we for our part should be free to slam the Commission - if I may use that expression - if it does not do the work well.
Finally, I should like to thank Mrs Bonino.
It is refreshing to have such an experienced rapporteur.
Thank you for a good report.
Mr President, very rarely from within the established power structures does anything new emerge.
The ban on anti-personnel mines has led to a process that is an excellent example of how NGOs and the European Parliament have been able to define and pursue with determination aims the statesmen either shun or consider unrealistic.
In the wake of the breakthrough at Ottawa we now have to ensure that the Union and its Member States attend to the continued action that is vital both in bilateral relations and internal legislation and maintain a leading role, as political will is being strengthened and sustained, so that the agreement is signed and ratified comprehensively, and by my own country, Finland, also.
It must also be made a precondition of EU membership for the candidate countries, i.e. become incorporated in the acquis communautaire.
The report under discussion and, in particular, the splendidly expressed opinion of the Committee on Development and Cooperation create the prerequisites for continued action, with the emphasis on actual mine clearance and attendant operations and not on seeking exotic and extremely costly technological solutions.
Biosensors are proving to be very promising in this regard.
The Brok resolution, for its part, offers a political dimension to this work and the questions for oral answer put to the Commission by Mr Brok and Mr Miranda offer guidelines that are of major importance.
All the institutions of the EU must work on their own initiative and in a way that the poor countries that suffer worst from the mines problem are effectively included in the programme.
The main responsibility for monitoring will naturally fall to the Commission, but we must all play a part in ensuring that joint voluntary work to remove this scourge worldwide is concluded as quickly as possible.
We can leave behind us a world without mines.
Mr President, our group has a history of calling for the entire spectrum of measures and action needed, from suspending production to destroying stocks, stopping trading, clearing mine fields, rehabilitating victims and raising public awareness.
However, I should like to make the following comment: the number of mines placed increases in direct proportion to the international community's inability to find political solutions to major problems.
When, for example, a country feels insecure along its border with another country, its government will take recourse, wrongly of course, to the easy option of a minefield.
When the international community cannot deal with the poison of nationalism and confrontation or help find political solutions, those involved will be more willing to take recourse to minefields.
We must bear this in mind because it seems to me, as far as the Balkans are concerned, that the West and the European Union must take their share of the responsibility, as the result of their political interventions, for the fact that half the Balkans are a total minefield.
I would like to end by saying that special action is needed in the Balkans and I should like to use this platform to say that the Greek Government should ratify the Ottowa Convention at once.
Mr President, the Cambodians call mines 'everlasting sentinels' .
These death traps, set off by chance by the victims themselves, sometimes many years after a conflict is over, are real time bombs that hinder the social and economic recovery of whole regions and the rehabilitation of the victims themselves.
As a signatory to the appeal for a world without mines, I fervently support Emma Bonino's report, because it is heading in the right direction.
Two years after the signing of the Ottawa Convention, the stockpile of mines remains, alas, an impressive one, at least as far as those that have been recorded is concerned.
For those that have still not been recorded, it is time to invent new methods of detection and identification.
It is essential for the European Union's financial input to complement national schemes.
Moreover, the European Union as a whole and the candidate countries must sign the Ottawa Convention and, more importantly, ratify it.
A very great deal is at stake here, for while war may have its rules, common law for some and codified law for others, the use of anti-personnel mines is not covered by them.
Eliminating them is no longer a military problem but a humanitarian issue.
Europe cannot confine itself to acting as provider of funds.
It is up to Europe to take the lead in considering the most appropriate mechanism, prior to deploying any new weapon.
Then it is up to the States to support the process in international fora.
To conclude, Europe must support and deepen the Ottawa process to ensure that we do not have another weapon creating dozens of victims every 20 minutes, as is happening now.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I strongly support the Community's initiative against anti-personnel mines.
I only have to picture children mutilated by mines to reach the very personal conclusion that every euro spent on opposing this madness is money well spent.
One point that NGO representatives have criticised in conversation with me is the combination of military activity with NGO work found in points 11 and 15 of the resolution.
In the course of many years' work, the NGOs have won people's confidence and respect, and I fear that such a combination could compromise the independence of the NGOs and permanently damage their relationship of trust with people in need.
People have a justified mistrust of uniformed personnel, born of many years of war.
We should therefore do everything we can to provide continuing support for the work of NGOs.
Mr President, I will speak very briefly during my allotted minute, just to express regret that the Council is not represented at such an important debate, although it is quite obviously the institution with the greatest scope for action in the field our Members are discussing at this moment.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to thank Mrs Bonino personally for all her work.
The Ottawa Convention represents an important step in the international campaign to ban the use, stockpiling, production and transfer of anti-personnel mines.
I therefore very much welcome the fact that this new regulation is to implement that convention with an EU strategy for improving the coordination, coherence, transparency and control of these actions on mines.
The European Union also has to live up to its claim to play a leading role in this area.
The Austrian Federal Government has always given this subject the highest priority.
As we have already heard today, Parliament has been dealing with this subject for many years.
Parliament is the driving force behind all these efforts, and I believe that we should step up these efforts still further.
At this point I wish to specifically stress that we need to call upon further States to sign or promptly ratify the Ottawa Convention, so as to assist international coordination and rehabilitation of mine victims.
First and foremost, the EU Member States should sign the Convention.
I regard this as a duty of solidarity within the European Community.
Mines are of course a great obstacle to reconstruction in these countries and to the return of refugees.
As long as this danger exists, it will be very difficult to persuade people who have fled their homes to return.
The European Union is often the most important contributor to financing de-mining actions, and international actions are carried out in the relevant countries.
The problem of anti-personnel mines is too big for the regions directly affected, and also for the refugees in the areas involved, so that without international cooperation it is not possible to provide effective support here.
The international community must adopt a coherent and coordinated approach.
Further progress needs to be made with support for de-mining programmes, assistance for mine victims, and research and technological development.
It is imperative for a ban to be imposed on producing mines in the EU and on exporting mines from the EU.
This objective should be an absolute priority for us all.
Mr President, I am pleased that we finally have European legislation, in the form of a regulation, on anti-personnel landmines and that today we have a good report on the subject by Mrs Bonino.
In the previous term of office - as we have heard - the European Parliament approved the commitment by the European Union to fight against one of the cruellest, most lethal, most cowardly weapons in existence.
The Committee on Development and Cooperation - as Mr Patten has said - introduced a budget line in 1996 dedicated to de-mining.
However, this heading line nonetheless unfortunately decreasing in inverse proportion to the emphasis we are placing on this matter here.
Given that we are now approving the budget, I will linger a moment over the figures that worry me.
This year the figure was EUR 8,100,000.
For the coming year, the Council and the Commission have agreed to reduce the total to EUR 7,400,000 and Parliament proposes an increase of EUR 3 million compared with the year 2000.
These figures are not much to solve a problem that affects 110 million people in 64 countries, 26,000 victims of mutilations every year and, vitally, the many children who are described in countries such as El Salvador as the broken children, as these children are maimed, missing their hands, arms or legs.
I therefore ask that the importance of increasing this amount be conveyed to the Council, which is not represented here, and to the Commission, given that unfortunately, for each mine that is cleared, between 20 and 50 others are laid.
At the current de-mining rate it would - as was mentioned earlier - take well over 100 years to clear the planet of anti-personnel landmines.
I therefore ask that, although it is not enough, account be taken of the amount proposed by Parliament and that it should contribute to respecting the Ottawa Convention and I ask those countries that have not signed it or ratified it to do so.
Since various comments have been made, I would like to specify that although the Minister is not present, the Council is represented by senior civil servants, who will of course pass our words on to him.
Mrs Bonino, one minute in which to talk about a report which really speaks volumes about your commitment is very little, but I am happily in agreement with most of the conclusions of the report, including the implied criticism of those countries which have still not ratified the Ottowa Convention.
My own country took all too long to do so, unfortunately.
There is a problem in the report.
In my opinion, there is a tendency to try to relieve the CFSP of civil assignments.
I believe it is healthy to strengthen the civil obligations of any organisation which has military activities.
What I mean in actual fact is that, in addition to carrying out their normal developmental and humanitarian activities, the Council, the CFSP and the Member States should be required to match any amount spent on military activities with at least a corresponding amount for civil activities, for example mine clearance in the relevant areas.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, we are discussing a very sad subject today.
I am sure we are all at least in agreement that anti-personnel mines should be outlawed worldwide.
I would like to subdivide this topic into three major areas.
The first area is that of prevention.
I am sure we in this Chamber agree that existing mines, and especially anti-personnel mines, must be destroyed.
When I think of the problems and the events in developing countries, such as those in the ACP area or in Central America, it is evident that things cannot continue like this.
Another point I regard as vital is that we need to tackle the black market, especially in Africa.
The second important area for me is follow-up action.
In this area we have to pay special attention to de-mining programmes and humanitarian actions.
In particular, research initiatives in this area need to be supported, especially those concerned with technology for detecting and clearing mines.
However, nor should we ignore the fact that the European Union, and in particular the European Parliament, is increasingly in a position to check more effectively where the money we intend for this purpose is actually going.
The third area I have in mind concerns specific measures that ought to be proposed, examined and implemented.
I believe that we should pay special attention to the victims of mines.
These are, for the most part, private individuals, civilians, children and child soldiers - another topic that we have already discussed.
With regard to children who have been mutilated in this way and therefore need long-term care, there is now the possibility of providing "growing" prostheses, which in Europe ...
(The President cut the speaker off)
Mr President, what we are basically doing in today's debate on the Bonino report, an excellent report, is codifying measures to deal with an extremely serious international problem.
The Titley report, which we voted on a few days ago, basically represents a second step forward on questions of common foreign, defence and security policy which will, I believe, slowly but surely build up into a global policy for the European Union with flesh on its bones in the form of uniform terms and uniform rules.
I think that time will prove that those who took the initiative were right and we will stop seeing charity workers alongside children with their legs blown off, given that the policy should work as a policy of prevention rather than repression.
It is no coincidence that most mines are to be found in crisis areas, i.e. in areas where a different sort of initiative could have been taken in order to resolve the crisis.
Now to a question which was touched on in connection with my country, Greece.
I am certain that the Greek Government will not delay in ratifying the convention in question, given that it has already signed it as a country.
However, we must bear in mind that it will do so despite the fact that 'neighbouring Turkey' does not have the best of intentions vis-à-vis Greece.
This is, unfortunately, a fact of life and was brought home to us again recently, last week in fact, during NATO exercises, which were seen as an opportunity for a different kind of policy in the form of a show of intransigence.
But let us hope that the future will bring a solution to these problems.
Be that as it may, I believe that the majority vote which this report will receive here in Parliament will strengthen it to the point at which even those who do not have eyes to see or ears to listen will see and will listen.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I support Mrs Bonino's report, which provides for greater efficiency and transparency, and on which the Committee on Development and Cooperation has given its opinion.
I would like to thank her for her outstanding work.
I witnessed the suffering of mine victims with my own eyes during and after the war in Bosnia, in 1992, 1995 and 1999.
Many victims are small children, who suffer terrible trauma and appalling mutilation, and whose lives are destroyed before they have even started properly.
Every child that we can protect from death or terrible injuries because of mines, be it in Bosnia, Africa or elsewhere, makes all our efforts worthwhile.
I would also like to sincerely thank the non-governmental organisations for their commitment.
I would briefly like to comment on one point, and this concerns our amendment to the motion for a resolution.
There is no worldwide consensus in favour of banning anti-vehicle mines. They are still regarded as essential protection against armoured vehicles throughout the world and within NATO.
No one should seek to belittle the achievements of Ottawa by saying that anti-vehicle mines should have been included.
In that case the Convention would certainly have been doomed to failure from the outset.
With regard to the enlargement of the EU, the candidate countries absolutely must sign the Ottawa Convention.
The USA, Russia and China should be urged to sign the Convention. Greece and Finland should ratify the Convention as soon as possible.
In conclusion, I would like to say that I would dearly like to see all mines banned throughout the world, as they are some of the most diabolical and repulsive arms that exist. Unfortunately, however, we are not in that utopian world.
Mr President, one day in December 1992, a young shepherd in Mozambique forgot the risk: he thought it had gone with the coming of peace.
That over-confidence cost him his left leg.
Two kilometres away from a hamlet in Bosnia, in 1999, a sign indicated the presence of mines in a field, but this did not stop a little boy going there.
For him it was a place to play, like any other.
Indeed, every time a war ends, people leave the refugee camps to return to their villages, hoping to lick their wounds and attempt gradually to rebuild a normal life.
But a mine is impervious to peace agreements and continues, inexorably, to do its job.
Even though 139 states have now signed the Ottawa Convention, mines are still doing their job of destruction.
Every 20 minutes somewhere in the world a mine will explode, bringing death or mutilation.
Of course, the Geneva Conference has brought some progress and we must stress that positive trend, for it really is the result of the determined battle the NGOs have long been waging.
However, the progress made should not blind us to the reality, and that reality is a total of 27 people killed and another 41 mutilated every single day.
The reality is 250 million mines in the arsenals of 105 countries.
Even last year, mines were used in 20 conflicts, mainly in Europe.
So I welcome the work done by my fellow Members, Emma Bonino and Luisa Morgantini, who have once again brought the political debate into the heart of this Parliament.
They make it clear how much we still need to do.
For my part, I want to highlight the need to adopt the convention universally so that it may become a total success, firstly by ensuring the compliance of the laws of the various states, so as not to have yet another example of an international agreement that fails to be applied.
We must indeed put pressure on those European Union countries that have not signed it, like Finland, or not ratified it, like Greece.
Why not consider sanctions, Commissioner, against those who do not respect the agreements?
Why not include a clause on accession to this convention in the enlargement conditions?
You replied to all that a moment ago.
I know there are still differences of opinion on this or that amendment.
Yet I would ask you to look at them more carefully, because some of them are acceptable to the Commission.
Whatever the outcome, we will all of us together show that we are determined to fight against what has to be called 'a cowards' war' .
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, war is a cruel way of solving people' s differences.
It is tragic when the civil population suffers as a result of its leaders' lack of skills and experience.
The Ottawa Convention, which restricts the use of mines, is a very worthwhile endeavour.
Too many children have lost their lives or become crippled while playing in a danger zone.
The EU' s aid programme is necessary and I fully back it.
It is our duty to help nations that are suffering as a result of political mistakes made long ago.
In some countries there are more mines than there are truffles in France, and both are as hard to find.
Although I am in favour of ending the misuse of mines, I do wish to raise the issue of the problems that Finland has in this connection.
Finland has not signed the Ottawa Convention, and reference has been made to that quite often here, as in the case of the previous speaker also.
The criticisms, however, are sanctimonious and based on ignorance.
Ladies and gentlemen, just look at Finland.
The country is sparsely populated and it has a land border with Russia that is more than a thousand kilometres long.
The history we share with our neighbour has often been full of anguish.
We must fall back on the old Roman truth: the best way to keep the peace is to prepare for war.
The mines are an essential part of Finland' s defences.
They cannot be used to conquer other countries, but are only used for purposes of defence.
All the mines in Finland are safely stored and are not exported to other countries. Their use is subject to stringent discipline.
I would like to stress this. Furthermore, all the mines are easy to remove in the wake of any conflict.
Finland cannot be put in the same category as many less developed countries, where the use of mines is very random and the inevitable consequences of that are evident.
It must be realised that Finland spends large sums of money on mine clearance in other countries.
In practice, this means removing mines with Finnish equipment, providing assistance for victims, and the destruction of mine stores.
This work supports the EU' s efforts.
Finland has already, for its own part, taken responsibility for the world' s mine problem.
This must, nonetheless, come about in such a way that one' s own country' s security is not compromised as a result of political pressures.
Welcome
Ladies and gentlemen, I am pleased to inform you that today we have the honour of welcoming to the official gallery a delegation of Moroccan MPs, led by Mr Ibrahim Rachidi, Vice-President of the Chamber of Representatives of the Kingdom of Morocco.
Allow me to welcome you on behalf of our institution, with which your country maintains privileged relations within the context of our joint project to construct an area of prosperity, safety and peace in the Mediterranean basin.
In the run-up to the 4th Euro-Mediterranean Ministerial Conference which will take place on 15 and 16 November in Marseilles, I am sure that your work with our Delegation for relations with the Maghreb countries, led by Mr Obiols, will enable our project for dialogue and peace to progress.
Anti-personnel mines (continuation)
Mr President, years ago when the international campaigns for landmine-clearance began, it used to be said that landmines were the poor countries' atomic bomb.
Despite the time that has passed, this apparent exaggeration may still unfortunately serve to describe the situation.
There can be no development without safe roads, without suitable land for cultivation and without places where children can play freely.
That is why the European Union joined and has come to play a leading role in the international campaign started by the United Nations, as has already been mentioned by the previous speakers.
We can now clearly see the merit of the proposal put before us, upon which Mrs Bonino has based her report.
I support this report and any other initiative to restate the role of the European Union in this objective.
I must stress that for this to occur the effort of the European Union must be more cohesive, bringing in Finland and Greece; the European Union must coordinate all its power to exert international pressure on those countries that have not yet accepted the Ottawa Convention; and the European effort must become more effective, for example through an increase in funding, taking into account the need for safe mine clearance, the systematic destruction of existing stockpiles and the further development of advanced mine detection and clearance technologies.
This effort must also be made more effective through coordination and monitoring of the processes, giving NGOs a more extensive role to play.
Lastly, I hope that among the future tasks of the European common military force will be the training of technicians, particularly of people with a local interest in the eradication of landmines.
Mr President, the Finnish Government last debated the question of anti-personnel mines on 14 June 1999.
At the time it was decided to look into how Finland might be a party to the Ottawa Convention in 2006 and replace anti-personnel mines with other defence methods by the end of 2010.
The Finns are involved in international cooperation with regard to mine clearance.
Experts from Finland and Finnish clearance vehicles have taken part in clearance programmes in Cambodia for two and a half years, and in Mozambique and Kosovo for one year.
As party to the convention, Finland complies with the regulations in the amended Mine Protocol in the Convention on Conventional Weapons 1996, which came into force in December 1998.
Finland does not feel it is militarily threatened.
However, we are the only EU country to have a land border with an external superpower that is more than a thousand kilometres long.
Finland herself is responsible for her credible defence arrangement.
Until a replacement military arrangement, which costs approximately half of Finland' s defence budget for one year, is in place, anti-personnel mines will remain a part of the defence arrangement.
In Finland, there is not one anti-personnel mine that has been placed in the ground.
Finland has never engaged in the export of anti-personnel mines and none have been manufactured in the country since 1981.
All the mines are in storage.
In Finland, no harm has come to civilians or Finnish soldiers from Finnish anti-personnel mines since the period of clearance that came in the wake of the Second World War that ended in the 1940s.
Finland is one of the unfortunately few countries in the world that sign and ratify international agreements only when they can meet the conditions they contain to the last letter.
And that is how it will also happen with regard to anti-personnel mines.
Mr President, as I agree with almost everything my colleagues have said, I do not want to repeat it, so I shall give up my speaking time.
That is the best thing we can do now so that we move on to the vote.
To close the debate, I have received one proposal for a resolution, pursuant to Article 42(5) of the Rules of Procedure.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place at 12 noon.
Vote
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, we are about to embark on a historic vote on a highly symbolic document, namely the European Constitution.
Yet it really would be a pity if we voted on a report littered with legal implausibility, with formal trash.
That cannot be our legacy to history.
I therefore propose, Mr President, that we refer this report back to committee, for cleaning up, so that this historic vote is not polluted by formal inconsistencies.
A request has been made, pursuant to the Rules of Procedure, to refer the report back to Committee.
Could I now hear one speaker for the request and one against, if there are any. Otherwise I will put Mr Martinez's request to the vote.
Mr President, I think that as far as trash is concerned we have had an example of this in Mr Martinez' s statement.
I do believe that today the far right is indeed talking trash in regard to the establishment of European democracy and that the Constitution will be a step towards building that democracy.
(Parliament rejected the request to refer the report back to Committee)
Following the vote on Amendment No 33:
Mr President, we have a slight problem with the wording.
We have just improved Paragraph 19.
But as a result of this little textual substitution we have let fall by the wayside an important principle that the European Parliament has always called for.
The fact is that, whatever our opinion on either side, whether we are for or against a constitution, we all agree that our Parliament should give its assent.
Thanks to this substitution, the term found in the original paragraph has been left out.
So, with the agreement of Olivier Duhamel, the rapporteur, I suggest incorporating this principle in the last line of Paragraph 20, which would therefore read as follows: "from the moment the process is initiated up to the approval (after receiving the assent of the European Parliament) of the final version of the Constitution" .
We would add these eight words.
That addition would bring Parliament into line with all its debates and all its votes.
Are there any objections to the inclusion of these eight words read out by Mr Onesta?
There are no objections?
Good, then let us proceed to the vote on this amendment.
Mr President, this is not an oral amendment to Amendment No 8.
It is an oral amendment to the original text.
You have just said to Amendment No 8 (or so I understood from the interpretation).
That is not the case.
It is a direct oral amendment to the text.
Mr Duhamel, there are no objections from the House to the oral amendment and it has therefore been adopted.
(Parliament adopted the resolution)
Report (A5-0288/2000) by Mr Gil-Robles Gil-Delgado, on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs, on reinforced cooperation [2000/2162(INI)]
(Parliament adopted the resolution)
Motion for a resolution (B5-0808/2000) on island status
(Parliament adopted the resolution)
Motion for a resolution (B5-0802/2000) on anti-personnel mines
(Parliament adopted the resolution)
Report (A5-0285/2000) by Mrs Sudre, on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, on the Commission report on the measures to implement Article 299(2): the outermost regions of the European Union [COM(2000) 147 - C5-0247/2000 - 2000/2135(COS)]
(Parliament adopted the resolution)
Report (A5-0272/2000) by Mr Bowis, on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, on the Commission White Paper on Food Safety [COM(1999) 719 - C5-0136/2000 - 2000/2082(COS)]
Mr President, I would propose an oral amendment of one word in Amendment No 11.
The words "close ties" have a sinister undertone to some, and so I propose to change that to "close contacts" on the understanding I have with the Liberal Group that it will then withdraw its amendment.
(Parliament adopted the resolution)
EXPLANATIONS OF VOTES - Bonino report (A5-0286/2000)
Mr President, I am very pleased to inform you that I voted for Mrs Bonino's report, which very commendably aims to contribute to averting the injuries sustained in peace time from these means of destruction.
I would, however, like to add that it would be appropriate for Parliament to concern itself with the real causes of the damage caused not only by anti-personnel mines but by all the weapons used by the human race.
The responsibility for these actions lies above all in the insanity of the Heads of State and Government of many of the world's states, and in the insanity of too many citizens who believe they can resolve their problems through war.
This must end.
Mr President, our group voted in favour of this report.
It is extremely important and we commend the European Parliament which played a very important role in the campaign to ban anti-personnel mines.
The NGOs have played a fundamental role.
They have pushed for a long time to get this through while some governments were very reluctant, saying it was unrealistic.
But if the will is there a lot can be achieved.
Governments must take a leading role and be forced to sign the Convention.
They must insist upon the new applicant countries signing the Convention as well.
When you look at what is happening around the world, it is intolerable that long after wars have ended people continue to suffer as a result of landmines.
Innocent civilians, women and men, and particularly children have been maimed and killed as a result of a weapon that was in place long after the war ended.
The idea that industries make money out of such inhumane materials is quite unacceptable.
Someone mentioned earlier the other weapons that are produced.
We must look at the production of all weapons, not just landmines, especially in the European Union since we must look outside our own front door first.
It is not acceptable or ethical that we are providing jobs or making money with things that kill, maim and injure people.
We should seek alternatives.
The idea that technology, know-how and money is spent on creating weapons that destroy people and the environment is unacceptable.
The move on landmines shows that progress can be made towards a humane society which does not profit from death and destruction.
The Danish Social Democrats have voted in favour of the report on action to be taken against anti-personnel mines.
The Commission' s communication sets out what actions the Community has already participated in to combat the use of anti-personnel mines.
Denmark has participated in humanitarian mine clearance on a number of occasions when the intervention concerned has been civil rather than military.
There has therefore been no conflict with the Danish opt-out in the field of defence.
The actions were financed with resources from many different budget lines.
The Commission therefore proposes that initiatives be taken to set up a horizontal budget line.
Parliament supports this solution because the present structure, with many different budget lines, is not transparent and does not contribute to coherent intervention.
It is still uncertain what legal base the Commission wants to propose for this initiative.
It is therefore also difficult right now to predict whether the initiative will clash with the Danish opt-out.
It will, however, be annoying if Denmark cannot participate in a project whose purpose is completely to do away with the feared and inhumane anti-personnel mines in the course of the next ten to fifteen years.
I strongly support the EP's decision to take positive action against anti-personnel landmines.
There is a an obligation on the part of the EU to take a stance against weapons which are aimed at non-combatants, the victims of which are largely non-combatants.
Also, the blanketing of large areas of territory makes it impossible for the growing of food many years after conflict has ended.
Even if we support the main intention of the report, we do not in any event agree with the ways described for achieving its aim.
We perceive a problem in the CFSPs being 'relieved' of responsibility for civil actions.
What is more, a serious policy for peace and security could better be achieved if CFSP resources and the Member States' resources for military action were to be supplied in a ratio of one to one, with increased appropriations for humanitarian actions.
Finland is aiming to become party to the Ottawa Convention in 2006 and replace anti-personnel mines with other military systems by the end of 2010.
At no stage has Finland exported anti-personnel mines to other countries.
Finland has produced and stored anti-personnel mines exclusively for its own defence needs.
Defence expenditure in Finland has traditionally been amongst the lowest in Europe.
The decision to give up anti-personnel mines presents an enormous challenge to Finnish national defence.
Anti-personnel mines are a weapon of defence.
Or can someone tell me how anti-personnel mines could be used in an attack?
They play a major role in the Finnish defence strategy.
Replacement programme solutions are being planned for discussion, in connection with a new investigation into defence, to take place by the year 2005.
Still to be examined are questions of financing, replacement systems and methods, and the effects of solutions on the development of defence doctrine.
Finland will continue with its participation in international cooperation relating to both the aim on a total ban and mine clearance.
As a small country, we too have headed the fight against the use of landmines.
Europe is in the vanguard of the mine-clearing and destruction programmes.
This is also why I endorsed the Bonino report.
I would like to draw particular attention to a technology for tracing mines which has been tailored to this field.
After all, one in a hundred mine-clearers will sooner or later fall victim to this activity, as a result of inaccurate detection methods.
The use of bio-sensors, such as trained dogs and rats, appears to yield particularly good results in practice.
Yet, the financial resources are mainly earmarked for developing high-tech military detection techniques.
Van Lancker report (A5-0291/2000)
Mr President, as a member of the European People's Party and, more importantly, as a member of the Pensioners' Party, and although none of the amendments I tabled in Committee were accepted, I can only vote for Mrs Van Lancker's report, particularly since point g thereof calls upon the Commission to establish a minimum pension for all the citizens of the European Union.
We in this Parliament discuss tyre pressures and the length of vehicles, but we have not yet succeeded in grasping how important it is for there to be a common regulation throughout the 15 Member States establishing a decent minimum pension.
This is why I voted for the report.
The Van Lancker report outlines a few general principles, such as the right to a pension or a minimum salary and the right to strike, something the EU Council' s text, the only one with the value of a decision, does not even mention.
For the rest, the rapporteur calls on Parliament to approve the supposed social policy the Commission has proposed to the Council, in other words, to approve a total vacuum, for there is not a single practical measure likely to improve the situation of the workers.
There is nothing to force big firms to create jobs and they can even carry on shedding jobs when they make big profits.
The leaders of the European Union are asking the two sides of industry to play a greater part in the areas of employment that come within their remit, but that is pure cynicism.
As if employers and employees were actually on an equal footing when it came to hiring.
It is like accusing the jobless of being at least partially to blame for their own unemployment.
So, while we voted to endorse the elementary social rights, in abstaining, we have rejected the general policy of complicity with the brutal practices of big business, which, throughout Europe, is making workers redundant, holding wages in check, creating more widespread job insecurity and weakening social protection.
I want to welcome the work done on the social agenda by the French Presidency and by Martine Aubry, in terms of both form and content, and I therefore offer warm congratulations to Mrs Van Lancker.
This agenda, which goes back to an initiative by the French Presidency, is a genuine programme of work for the next five years.
It is in keeping with the decisions of the Lisbon European Council, whose main conclusions relate to establishing a more competitive knowledge-based economy and achieving full employment.
It was drawn up in consultation with the European institutions and the NGOs, which were kept fully involved.
The Van Lancker report takes account of some of the proposals made by civil society and experts at the joint conference on the subject between the European Commission and the European Parliament on 21 and 22 September 2000.
So this agenda sends out a strong political message to European citizens, who all too often perceive Europe as merely the creation of a large market.
It highlights the existence and reality of the European social model, but also the need to bring it up to date.
We do not have the right to disappoint our citizens.
The social agenda must therefore be very ambitious in order to confirm that social, economic and employment policies are closely interlinked and interacting, and that they must have equal status in the Community policy triangle, with the aim of improving the social quality of life for all.
Indeed, social policy must be a policy in its own right, with its own objectives.
It cannot be seen solely as an adjunct of economic and employment policy or as a by-product of creating a large single market, and even less as mere "dross" .
In the five years to come, we will have to create quality jobs, anticipate and manage the adjustments to the new social environment, draw on the opportunities offered by a knowledge-based economy, modernise and improve social protection, promote social inclusion, encourage gender equality, reinforce fundamental rights and combat discrimination.
I welcome the adoption at Nice of this social agenda, which, together with the Charter of Fundamental Rights, shows that we have reached a turning point in European integration, which, at present, seeks to strengthen the social and civil fabric of the Union.
The European Union as a political and economic entity is growing from strength to strength.
However, economic achievement is not the sole criteria to judge European Union legislators.
It is incumbent on all of us to ensure that key social problems within our community are solved and tackled head-on.
In this regard, I welcome the acceptance by the European Commission of the Irish Government' s Human Resources Operational Programme for the seven-year period 2000-2006.
This is a very fair and balanced social programme and is one of the very central planks of the Irish Government' s National Development Plan for the seven-year period post-1999.
It will ensure that opportunities will be given to those who are unskilled and uneducated.
Particular emphasis will be placed on putting in place schemes to help the long-term unemployed as well as to help those who are early school leavers.
There is also a recognition in this plan, which is reflected in the EU Social Policy Agenda 2000-2005, of the need to ensure that re-training opportunities are given to people in the existing workforce.
The EU Social Policy Agenda recognises that re-training opportunities must be given in the field of technology and Internet activities for the existing workforce.
Technology is changing so rapidly that if the European Union is to keep a competitive edge then our European Union workforce must be equipped with the necessary computer skills.
Adaptability of the workforce and the encouragement of entrepreneur skills are also central planks of the Irish Government' s plans for the next seven years.
For this policy to be a success at home and for it to succeed within the broader European Union context then it is an imperative that second-level and third-level institutions put in place policies to implement entrepreneurship in Europe.
This report represents a major step forward on the road to building a social and employment Europe.
It draws on the Lisbon Summit conclusions, with a view to achieving an agreement at Nice on establishing a European Social Agenda, as a foundation of European social policy for the next five years (2000-2005).
It offers a global and coherent vision of what a genuine social policy could look like, by linking economic, social and employment aspects.
It uses all the instruments that now exist at European Union level - the Social Charter, the employment chapter, the legal base of Article 13 - to combat all forms of discrimination, etc.
Our rapporteur endorses the European Commission's proposals, while supplementing them with a call for stronger European social legislation.
He calls for the role of the social partners concerned, and dialogue with them, to be reinforced in the framing of legislation.
However, in the event of dispute, our committee urges the executive Commission to make use of its right of initiative and to propose adequate legislation.
It is important to achieve a more social Europe, therefore to have more European social legislation.
Furthermore, the rapporteur asks us to support the Member States in their endeavours to establish a minimum wage and the right to a minimum pension so that every individual can live in dignity.
I can only urge you to support this report, which, like the Charter of Fundamental Rights, embodies the values we share and that ensure that our Union is not just reduced to a market.
The report concerns the socio-political agenda for the next five years.
It contains a series of proposals we wholeheartedly support for improving social conditions and workers' conditions.
We appreciate the rapporteur' s words on the open coordination method which respects the Member States' independence on socio-political issues and is founded upon voluntary harmonisation and coordination.
We are, nonetheless, concerned that the report at the same time contains proposals to the effect that the Commission must be the engine for developing social policy in Europe, meaning growing supranationalism in this area too.
If the legislation concerning labour market and social policy is to operate well, it must be the end result of a process of change that develops from below and reflects the variety of conditions and experiences in Europe.
I wish to state that I voted against Mrs Van Lancker' s report.
Rarely do such conservatively socialistic reports find their way into the European Parliament plenary sitting as this report of Mrs Van Lancker' s on the EU' s socio-political programme that we voted for.
In her programme declaration, Mrs Van Lancker says she would like to implement all those measures whose very implementation people sought to prevent by voting in a non-socialist majority in the European Parliament in the last elections. I repeat, 'prevent' .
I shall be quite appalled if the Commission really intends to support these totally unrealistic, almost absurd demands, which have just been approved.
Parliament' s proposals could not be more at odds with the aims of Lisbon.
At Lisbon the mainly socialist leaders of the EU governments declared aloud their aim to make Europe the world' s most dynamic and competitive economy.
If Mrs Van Lancker' s proposals are adopted we shall definitely be stepping back light years in terms of our ability to achieve the important, ambitious and indispensable aims of Lisbon.
What then does the good lady propose?
According to Mrs Van Lancker, working hours in Europe must be shortened significantly, the body of EU socio-political legislation must be increased substantially, the levels of social protection in Europe must be raised massively, the power of the Trade Union movement increased and supranational labour market negotiations made possible, labour organisations must be given greater rights to be heard, and socio-political influence must be a priority in all sectors of the economy, in competition policy and in public procurements.
I might just remind my colleagues of the wise words of the Chairperson of the CDU, Angela Merkel, who said that in politics we need more sociability, but sociability is not the same thing as socialism.
I cannot resist the pleasure of indulging in terms, or rather coining phrases, worthy of those used in the report in order to condemn your repeated e-pocrisy regarding employment and social protection.
So you can rave on forever about the information society, which will resolve every last problem once everyone, from babes in arms to grey-beards, not forgetting illiterates, will have an email address even if they cannot afford to pay for the computer equipment to consult it.
In fact, in your e-Europe efforts will be made to provide everyone with this equipment once the computers start looking at the users more than the users look at the computers and once they start drawing up reports.
Your endless ravings are not quite so funny once we realise that their purpose is not the welfare of European citizens but ever more and more laws, directives and regulations from Brussels.
Your concept of open cooperation is a reversion to an institutional system dominated by Commission officials.
The only thing that is truly open, wide open, is the possibility of extending the powers of Brussels to infinity, without ever referring back to square one and the Treaties.
You are proposing to give Brussels powers to manage and define minimum social protection, flexible work, which means exploiting the worker, imposing cuts on working hours, which freezes wages and handicaps enterprises, and an absolute stranglehold on social dialogue, like Aubry in France.
That is why we will abstain on this report: for even if we welcome its display of concern, however spurious or even belated, for employment, we cannot in all decency approve its practical proposals.
We have voted against Mrs Van Lancker' s report on the social policy agenda.
The Commission' s proposal for a new social policy agenda is a good document.
The Commission' s work defines a number of areas within which cooperation and coordination between the European Union' s Member States is important.
The Commission' s new political agenda proposes a framework in which all important actors can play a role and in which the differences between the national systems are respected.
The Commission will use its right of initiative and support the Member States in bringing necessary changes about.
Mrs Van Lancker wants Parliament to decide whether to alter the Commission' s proposal, mainly through, firstly, adding a number of areas to which legislation is applicable and, secondly, through establishing a number of rights at European level.
Mrs Van Lancker believes that significantly more use should be made of compulsory instruments.
The Commission must not be prevented from using its right of initiative in those areas in which it has the power to act and to propose compulsory instruments.
Our basic attitude towards the European Union is a very positive one.
In our capacity as Swedish Liberals, we see European integration as a possible way of achieving solutions to cross-border problems such as the environment, trade, movement across the borders, human rights and conflict management.
In these areas, Europe' s democracies have a chance to show the world that cooperation leads to peace and increased prosperity.
We also believe in the principle of subsidiarity whereby decisions must be made as close as possible to those they affect.
That is why we are actively pushing the issue of a constitution for the European Union in which the distribution of responsibilities is clear to everyone.
It must be perfectly clear to all citizens that the EU must only deal with those issues it is best placed to deal with, namely the cross-border issues.
All other issues must be dealt with at local, regional or national levels.
We think that the Commission' s proposal for a social policy agenda ties in well with our view of how the EU needs to operate.
A form of European cooperation which leads to coordination and more prosperity is the right course of action.
The European social systems differ from each other to such an extent that compulsory legislation will not lead to an appropriate result.
We wish therefore to support the Commission' s proposal and are consequently voting against Mrs Van Lancker' s report on the social policy agenda.
Workers often have problems in identifying with Europe.
Whilst in view of global trends the European single market is developing in a dynamic way, and there is ever closer economic and monetary union, social union is generally treated like a ghost at the feast.
Since the Treaty of Amsterdam was agreed in 1997, the Union has had new instruments for enhancing social policy.
And since the Lisbon Summit in March 2000, it has been the Council's intention, in addition to high growth and more skilled jobs, also to aim for greater social cohesion.
With the third social action programme, the Commission is underscoring the recognition that economic policy, employment policy and social policy need to be more closely interlinked.
Employability is providing evidence of this interlinking. In order to make the transition from the industrial society to the knowledge society, people - and not just young people - need better knowledge and skills.
This means that the Member States have to invest more in education and training, multilingualism, mobility and communication.
Many of the demands made in the Van Lancker report are not acceptable.
For example, the Luxembourg process which applies to employment policy is to be extended to social protection and social exclusion.
This method of determining Community objectives and implementing national action programmes which are assessed annually - including by the European Parliament - is so successful precisely because new qualitative and quantitative objectives are formulated whilst simultaneously strictly adhering to the principle of subsidiarity.
It cannot arbitrarily be transferred to other areas, as specific procedures are needed.
The Christian Social Party does not support the right to a minimum income or a standard pension.
Nor do we accept the renewed demands for a reduction in legal working hours at European level.
It is far inferior to flexible working arrangements, as the experience of many European companies has demonstrated.
Furthermore, the request that there should be a legal basis for NGOs to regulate a "civil dialogue" is not acceptable.
The rapporteur has departed from the principle of subsidiarity out of a sheer desire to adopt centralist solutions.
However, as the Group of the European People's Party's key amendments have just obtained a substantial majority, I have voted for the report.
The EPLP has voted for the Van Lancker report on the social agenda because there are many positive aspects to this report on the European social agenda and this text will inform the Nice summit and the Commission work programme, but is not legislative.
However, there are several areas of concern where new legislative measures are being proposed.
In some, these relate to tasks which are best tackled at Member State level, or are premature in that legislation recently passed has not yet had time to bed down and be evaluated.
In a number of places - Paragraphs 14a, 14b and 14c - the EPLP could not support the call for "tax and legislative measures" and "directives" for the reasons stated above.
On the right to strike, the EPLP has abstained.
The EPLP feels that this is already dealt with by Member State legislation and is also covered in the Charter of Fundamental Rights.
The EPLP could not support the call for a legislative arrangement for worker participation in the framework of the European Company Statute as the industrial relations dimension is dealt with in other legislation.
Finally, the EPLP feels that the new directives in the field of combating discrimination under Article 13 have not yet had a chance to be implemented or bed down.
Therefore the EPLP has voted against the proposals for new vertical directives, as further legislation would be premature.
Biarritz informal European Council
Mr President, during yesterday' s debate the Council pointed out that in Biarritz the governments' positions had begun to converge on the principle of extending qualified majority voting.
We find that statement rather disturbing and at this point I would like to refer, among other things, to two matters that cause us serious concern.
Firstly, the Commission has proposed communitising - i.e. introducing by means of qualified majority voting in the Council without ratification by the national parliaments - international trade negotiations on services and intellectual property, a possibility indeed already opened by Article 132(5) of the Treaty of Amsterdam.
But we regard this transfer as very dangerous, for it would deprive the national parliaments of any right of inspection in regard to future WTO negotiations on these areas that are vital to the life of our societies.
But there is worse to come.
The Commission added negotiations on investments to the list of subjects to be communitised.
If that proposal were accepted, we may be sure that in the coming six months the Commission would impose another version of the Multilateral Agreement on Investment on us, the infamous MAI which it was possible to reject, two years ago, only because it came under strictly intergovernmental procedures.
So, once again, the Commission is behaving shamefully in trying to strip the national democracies of their powers, without at the same time making us stronger, contrary to what it says.
The second category of decisions that would cause us concern if they were to be decided by qualified majority voting relates to immigration and the international movement of persons, which, under Article 67 of the EC Treaty, require unanimity for at least five years after the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam but can then be decided by a majority.
The Commission is calling for this changeover as of now.
We energetically reject it.
In this field, we have learned from experience that any transfer of power to the Commission encourages a lax attitude, while any maintenance of Member State power encourages attitudes that promote security, relatively speaking.
We opt for security.
Over and above the legal quibbling on all sides, the Biarritz Summit has confirmed that the process of European enlargement is a matter of laborious haggling.
The major powers, such as Germany, France, the United Kingdom and, to some extent, Italy, are all agreed in their desire to dominate the small countries of Eastern or Southern Europe that are applying for accession to the European Union.
At the same time, each country is seeking to ensure its own supremacy and to guarantee the interests of its own industrial or financial groups.
The way is being prepared not just for a two-speed Europe, but for the introduction of less developed countries into the arena dominated by the large predators of the European economy. On the outside, these countries are already preyed on, and they will continue to be so on the inside.
As for the Charter of Fundamental Rights, the only reason the meeting of Heads of State and Government signed it was in order to be seen to make a statement.
The signed document remains vague on elementary human rights, social protection and the freedom of movement of third country nationals.
The only area in which it is precise is on the right of ownership and entrepreneurial freedom, which only concerns owners of capital.
We have no intention whatsoever of accepting either the Biarritz Summit decisions or what will be decided at the coming summit in Nice.
Mr President, I abstained from voting on the resolution on the results of the informal Biarritz European Council for two reasons: firstly, because I had the opportunity to vote in person on Paragraphs 2 and 5 separately, which allowed me to express my total opposition to both.
In fact, I do not agree with the inclusion in the Treaty of the Charter of Fundamental Rights, since that would be the first step on the way to its constitutionalisation, a federalist pathway that I will not go down.
Secondly, nor do I agree with the indiscriminate generalisation of qualified majority voting, a measure which if divorced from the others on the table may conflict with important national interests, and which even contradicts the request expressed in Paragraph 7 of the resolution.
It was precisely this Paragraph 7 that enabled me to abstain.
By not voting against the resolution I am trying to support any initiative that will put an end to the antagonistic atmosphere between large and small countries in which the debate on institutional reform has taken place, and which unfortunately has to a great extent been instigated by the French Presidency.
As Paragraph 7 says, it is absolutely necessary to ensure that solutions are valid and acceptable to all Member States, regardless of their size or economic weight.
We are Europeans and want to remain Europeans, but there must be respect for the founding principle of a Union of free and sovereign states.
We are voting in favour of the resolution, but we wish to comment on the following points:
The Charter of Fundamental Rights ought to be in the nature of a political declaration made at the Nice Summit.
Unanimity in decision-making should not only apply to issues of a constitutional nature but also to issues of fundamental importance to the Member States.
We in the Austrian Freedom Party have from the outset declared ourselves in favour of a legally binding Charter of Fundamental Rights.
However, for legal reasons we think that it is wrong to refer to it at this early stage in Article 6 of the Treaty on European Union, because it was not possible to reach formal agreement on it within the convention, reflecting its structure, and it therefore has no legal status.
The demand that the Charter be incorporated into the Treaties is therefore all the more premature.
This is also true because in contrast to the European Human Rights Convention, which was ratified by the Member States, the process of formulating political demands and objectives in this respect has not taken place in national parliaments.
It is for these reasons alone that we have not voted for both parts of point 2 of the resolution.
I voted for this resolution because in it Parliament wisely does not opt for the 'imperialist' theses of the large, populous European countries against the self-affirmation of the others.
The resolution limits itself to a responsible vote so that a sensible balance can be found based on the history of the Community.
Thus those who would like to see Parliament become an 'echo chamber' for the more populous countries' revisionist intentions will be defeated.
Leaving aside the Charter of Fundamental Rights, which, in an ageing Europe, where we will see more than 50 million people aged over 75 in two decades' time, has made no provision for strengthening the right to economic, social and human protection, Biarritz was concerned mainly with axing the number of issues requiring unanimity, the only procedure that can respect the interests of the people, and with the curious invention of closer cooperation, also known as the Europe of circles, the Europe of pioneers, the à la carte Europe, vanguard Europe, 'variable geometry' or two-speed Europe.
From 1951 in Paris, to 1997 in Amsterdam, via 1957 in Rome, what has been going on?
Europe was created by Treaties concluded, obviously, between equal states.
Moreover, over and above the legal aspect, Europe is a great family of civilisations in emotional terms. We all have the same home.
Now, the idea of closer cooperation means that in crucial areas, such as money, defence and taxation, some members of the European family would have more rights and obligations than others.
In other words, among those sitting round the table of the common European home, some would eat à la carte while others would get the dish of the day.
Some would have a say about money while others, like Denmark or Sweden, would have to hold their tongue.
As we saw before the existence of total, universal suffrage, there would be active "peoples" and observer "peoples" .
There would, in a sense, be "males" with the right to talk war, taxes and money and, as in pre-1945 France, "females" sitting round the table with no right to decide.
Moreover, in this 'variable-geometry' Europe, the number of guests with the right to eat à la carte would vary depending on the subject under discussion in the European Council of Ministers and this state of affairs would create further complexity in a Europe whose way of operating is already quite obscure.
In other words, the philosopher's stone of closer cooperation, which would allow the rule of unanimity and the right of veto, which protects national interests, to be circumvented on the sly, would achieve the amazing feat of violating the principle of equality between states, excluding minority nations from key issues, thus opening up cracks in the democratic foundations of European integration, making the European institutions even less transparent and spreading confusion, if not disarray, within the Council and the Commission.
Once again, the technocratic smokescreen and verbal fog are conceal machinations intended to foist on the peoples a military and fiscal Europe that they do not want and to deprive them of their right to say no to the loss of their national freedoms.
The voting on this report reflects the EPLP's opposition to incorporation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights into the Treaty and the section of the report restricting unanimity in the Council to constitutional issues.
The EPLP has consistently not supported incorporation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights as rights are covered by national legislation and the European Convention on Human Rights.
Inclusion of new text into the Treaties is likely to create legal confusion.
The restriction of unanimity in the Council to constitutional issues would exclude key issues such as taxation and social security which, we believe, should remain the responsibility of Member States.
The resolution contains good sections on the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the Middle East and the EPLP supports the resolution overall.
Summit meetings of Heads of State and Government always raise great expectations.
The Biarritz Summit was heralded as the decisive Summit which would affirm fundamental rights, all rights, even rights never conceived of previously, as if the European Communities and their constituent States had hitherto lived in total chaos.
And yet our countries do not appear to be the least attentive countries in the world to human rights.
There is always room for improvement, of course, and democratic control must not be found wanting in this respect, but we did not feel that cataloguing these rights and including them in the Treaties should be the European Union's top priority.
Moreover, even the Heads of State and Government have not been able to reach agreement on this issue, and it is to be carried over to the forthcoming Nice Summit.
And yet there are so many urgent issues to be dealt with: 1) the need to define an economic policy which will rescue the euro from the stagnant depths to which it has plunged and boost employment; 2) the need to attract investment to the Union in order to break out of the economic slump; 3) the need to revise employment regulations to make the market more dynamic and more responsive; or 4) the need to define a common line for a coherent diplomatic action to safeguard peace in the Middle East, etc.
All of these issues are extremely important and urgent in terms of the Union's future and the function which it ought to be performing in the world.
However, as is often the case with these summits, the celebratory final declarations conceal a reality which is much more banal: the Fifteen have not succeeded in establishing a common policy and the progress made with the unveiling of rights does not take away from the need to tackle the practical problems encountered by millions of families and entire categories of producers and workers.
A summit which tackles these issues would show the validity of such an institution once and for all, and would send a signal of confidence and hope to the citizens of the Union.
Duhamel report (A5-0289/2000)
Mr President, we voted against the Duhamel report on the European Constitution because, following the well-established Monnet recipe, seeking to make a fundamental political about-turn under cover of technical considerations, without ever clearly telling people that the main intention is to put an end to a concept of Europe under which each nation primarily obeys its national constitution.
In the explanatory statement, the rapporteur says a little more about this and maintains that the Treaty is already broadly supranational, largely as a result of the Court of Justice' s case-law interpretations.
In our view, however, the interpretations of 15 judges, which go beyond the Treaties as ratified, are clearly improper and we are still waiting for them to be submitted for the approval of the peoples of the Member States.
Elsewhere, the rapporteur repeats the new theory in vogue in Brussels of the supposed dual legitimacy of the European Union: that of the citizens represented by the European Parliament and that of the States represented by the Council.
That is not the theory as set out in the Treaty, which recognises only one form of legitimacy, namely, and I quote, that of: "the peoples of the States brought together in the Community" , according to the wording of Articles 189 and 190 of the EC Treaty.
This wording means that the Community brings together only the States, each of which depends on the support of its people.
In no case do the MEPs represent the European citizens in general.
They represent their respective peoples and, by that token, cooperate in the European scrutiny of the States, but that scrutiny remains complementary, because the main power of scrutiny falls within the remit of the national parliaments.
In other words, the fact that MEPs represent their respective peoples in no way modifies the nature of the Community.
It in no way has the effect of placing some phantom European citizen above the national citizens, even less of placing an artificial European democracy above the national democracies or even on the same footing with them.
Mr President, I fully support the Duhamel report.
I am sure that pensioners and elderly people feel that Europe represents a future of peace, and we therefore support any step, however small, in that direction.
How could the Pensioners' Party not be pro-Europe, since it is the only party which is represented solely at the European Parliament and not in the national States?
I am entitled to say that I am the only representative of a party which is only present at the European Parliament.
Is there anybody more Europeanist than Carlo Fatuzzo?
In these very general terms, I conclude that this report enhances the very essence of what we pensioners want: a genuinely united Europe.
Mr President, I voted against the Duhamel report because I do not believe that we are taking the right approach.
I agree with what Mr Berthu has said, that the idea of a single state with a single constitution completely undermines the national sovereignty of the Member States.
This project has been sold on the idea of a constitution for the people, which is all well and good, but if you have a single constituency you are diluting the power of the individuals in the Member States.
There has been talk about referenda and the amendments that were made to this report in relation to referenda.
Referenda are very important, but in the case of a single constituency, where you ignore almost 50% in a Member State who may vote against it, this is not democratic.
It is interesting to see people putting forward the idea of a referendum in this way because if you consider the changes that have taken place in the treaties over the years, the Single European Act, the Maastricht Treaty and the Treaty of Amsterdam, very few citizens in the individual Member States have had a say and, as a result, we are not sure what the citizens in the Member States want.
The recent referendum in Denmark on the euro shows there are very many people who, given the opportunity, would make different statements to those made in this House, but they do not have that opportunity.
Mr President, I abstained in the vote on the request to refer back the Duhamel report, by way of protest.
I am of course a fierce opponent of the extreme right here in Parliament.
But I am deeply disturbed, Mr President, that it is possible here in this Chamber for a Member of the left - I have forgotten now who it was - to call elected Members of this House "polluters" of this Chamber, without you calling that Member to order.
We should not accept language like that, because it is exactly the kind of language used by the extreme right in power in my home country when I was not yet born or was just a small child.
We should not accept this, whoever uses such language, whether it comes from the extreme right or the extreme left.
The Swedish and Danish Social Democrats have today voted against Oliver Duhamel' s report on incorporating the Treaties into a constitution.
The report is based upon an assumption that the Treaties are to contain a fundamental element, that the common policies are to be included as protocols to the framework treaty and that there are to be different procedures for adapting the different texts.
We believe that the basis for cooperation in the EU should continue to be unanimity on the basic questions concerning the legal base on which the EU is founded.
We cannot therefore vote in favour of the report.
We nonetheless agree with the report when it points out that, in their present wording, the Treaties leave a lot to be desired in terms of simplicity and transparency.
We should therefore like to see the texts reworked in such a way as to permit more rational and intelligible access to the objectives in developing the EU and to the resources for doing so.
, in writing. (SV) Unfortunately, the European Parliament' s Committee on Constitutional Affairs has not taken on board anything of what has happened in the European Union in recent years.
Only 40 per cent of people voted in the 1999 elections to the European Parliament, if countries with voting duties are discounted, as well as those which had national elections at the same time as elections to the European Parliament.
This just goes to show how little enthusiasm there was for the EU federalist project in 1999.
Now, in September 2000, the Danes have voted against membership of EMU, and people in a number of other Member States would certainly have voted against the EMU project, given the opportunity.
It is interesting to note that, on the night of the EMU referendum last month, the Danish Social Democrats were exultant when the votes from the upper class areas had been counted and disappointed when they saw how people in working-class areas had voted.
This ought to act as a wake-up call to the fact that something is going wrong in the development of the EU.
In spite of these setbacks for the idea of a federal EU State, the Committee on Constitutional Affairs has now produced a further report designed to produce a constitution for the EU, in spite of the fact that this is not in any way something which people are demanding.
What is needed instead is a clearer definition of the 'proximity principle' in the European Union.
At present, this principle is merely a tool for the EU itself, for it is at present at EU level that it is decided where the political decisions are to be made, with the result that the EU is claiming policy area after policy area for itself.
What is more, there is a need to simplify the flexibility rules so that they do more to facilitate European cooperation in accordance with the wishes of the people of Europe.
Moreover, those areas which do not concern the European Union and in which the Member States have the sovereign right to make decisions ought to be carefully demarcated.
The Portuguese socialist MEPs voted for the Duhamel report on the constitutionalisation of the Treaties essentially because they agree with the need for the European Union to simplify and organise the fundamental texts that govern it, which today have become virtually unreadable on account of the complexity introduced by the successive accumulation of Treaties.
To this end, it is essential that the European Union should move towards a Constitution that incorporates the Charter of Fundamental Rights.
The experience of a full democracy in the European Union has everything to gain from the approval of a Constitution that is clear, simple, readable and a source of reference for all citizens.
The Portuguese socialist MEPs do not, however, agree that ratification of this 'Constitution' should necessarily be carried out by means of a referendum.
One must not infer from this position that we are against the use of the referendum as an institution or that the achievement of greater political depth in the European Union should occur without the Portuguese people being consulted.
This choice should be made independently and freely and should not have to depend on an imposed measure that might clash with the constitutional practice of an individual country.
That is why the Portuguese socialist MEPs voted against the proposal of their own political group, which indicated a uniform referendum model for all the Member States of the European Union.
To achieve the desirable objective of a European Constitution it is inadvisable to impose rigid patterns and methods, which would inevitably lead to failure.
In such a sensitive matter, boldness and prudence should go hand in hand.
In terms of both form and substance, I support Olivier Duhamel' s stance and also his report.
As a European from the very outset, an activist and President of the Northern European Movement and of the 'Citizens of Europe' association, I am a European federalist because I believe in a political, social and citizens' Europe that is both democratic and effective.
At a time when our European Union is becoming bogged down in rampant nationalism and threatened by more or less cleverly camouflaged fascistic attitudes, we needed and we need a breath of fresh air.
Olivier Duhamel and his report together achieve this very ably.
So I have voted for his report with determination and a degree of enthusiasm.
While appreciating what Olivier Duhamel has achieved, I abstained from the final vote because I think the debate on a European Constitution is premature.
While desirable in itself, a constitution of this kind could only be adopted as the crowning touch to far-reaching institutional reform.
A constitution would be meaningful only if it formed the democratic framework for a genuine European federation, a United States of Europe.
So long as the EU remains no more than a sum of nation states that practise only a limited form of solidarity, limited in budgetary terms to a ceiling of 1.27% of Europe' s gross domestic product, any attempt to "constitutionalise" the existing Treaties is nothing more than a headlong rush into politically dodgy territory.
In the name of the democratic Europe we want to build, we reject the report.
By resorting again to the means and objectives used for the Charter of Fundamental Rights in order now to draft a constitution, the Union is persisting in constructing a Europe that is made neither by the people nor for them, be they citizens of the Member States or the candidate countries.
It is not built for the people, for there is not a single word on the social content of Europe.
Like a charter that gives precedence to entrepreneurial freedom and ownership, without protecting Europe' s 62 million poor and 18 million unemployed, we are now talking about political reinforcement of the liberal Europe of Maastricht.
A genuine social constitution ought to bring together, from the top down, the best acquired rights for work, women, immigrants and citizens.
Nor is it built by the people, despite a few hypocritical allusions to possible future referenda, because, once again, a few institutional delegations are to decide the fate of 385 million individuals.
European general assemblies of the social movement would have allowed us to make progress towards a genuine charter of the rights of peoples and workers.
Everything has been done to stage a sanitised debate between supporters of federalism and supporters of sovereignty.
That is all the easier when social issues are not addressed.
We reject this choice as the wrong one and, like the social movement, call for a different charter for a different Europe.
The vote on this report in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs, adopted by 18 votes in favour, 2 against and 6 abstentions, reflects the gulf dividing the Members of the European Parliament on this subject.
This own-initiative report by Mr Duhamel can be classed as one that were better not written, especially at this point in time.
For as things stand in the various Member States, it risks being rather counterproductive at a time when the top priority is not a very broad debate on a constitution but rather the drafting of a treaty that will allow the European Union to digest enlargement without endangering the Community method, which is the key to the success of European integration.
In this 'constitution versus treaty' debate, I tend to place more trust in Jacques Delors than in Mr Duhamel and those who supported him in submitting this report.
As Jacques Delors rightly pointed out at a meeting of our Committee on Constitutional Affairs scarcely a month ago, the term 'constitution' is extremely ambiguous.
He told us that he, like the majority of politicians, had been given to believe that we would prefer our relations with other countries to be governed by international treaty.
In a framework of that kind - and I am still referring to Jacques Delors' s words - we would agree to exercise joint sovereignty in certain fields.
But a constitution is something else entirely.
It refers to a single state.
A constitution would commit the Member States to venturing onto very dangerous ground, which could lead a constitutional court to gradually deprive the nations of the prerogatives the states intend to continue exercising.
A good treaty is worth more than a treaty that can be dubbed a constitution. That is the last of Jacques Delors' s observations.
In complete agreement with the common sense of Jacques Delors' s words, I did not vote in favour of Mr Duhamel' s report.
Although I do not reject the praiseworthy intention of strengthening, clarifying and deepening the European Union and of simplifying the texts so as to bring its workings closer to the citizens, I did not vote in favour of this motion for a resolution.
The resolution is essentially like a 'Pandora' s Box' , as the text does not make it formally clear what purpose it serves or where the real need or urgency for a European Constitution lies.
By its very nature a Constitution may, in the form in which it is sometimes contradictorily put forward for Europe, both serve as a way to 'civilise' the Union, on the basis of democracy and citizenship, and also be the instrument for a 'clarification' of competences, a chalk circle which formally and definitively constrains the Union and its bodies to very particular and specific competences.
The constitutionalisation of the Treaties may either bring about the development of the Union and uphold its political competences, or in contrast it may be no more than an enshrined formalisation of the principle of subsidiarity.
Strangely, many MEPs and even Prime Minister Blair support a European Constitution.
Despite the clarity of Mário Soares' s speech, in which he interpreted this report in its deep European sense, without concessions to easy solutions through highly risky referendums, for which there is no tradition in many Member States, it remains simply an unsullied interpretation by a European of conviction who has made his mark on history.
Unfortunately, the text does not match the idea and desire of Portugal' s leading European.
This discrepancy, the blame for which lies entirely with the report' s author for not being clear and precise, is at the root of my unease with the text and why I find it politically impossible to vote for it.
I would even have voted against it, but this would have been an over-radical way of judging a text as important as this.
I welcome Mr Duhamel' s report as an interesting and constructive contribution to the idea of constitutionalisation of the Treaties.
While it could be argued that the existing Treaties are in essence the European Constitution they are difficult to read and their articles are not always in a logical order.
A future Constitution could set out in a clear and (relatively) concise way
the fundamental rights of European citizens
the principle of the separation of powers and the rule of law
the composition, role and functioning of the institutions of the Union
the allocation of powers and responsibilities
the subsidiarity principle
the role of European political parties
the objective of European integration.
There is both a positive and a negative side to this report.
It has been noted - rightly so - that over the years, there has been a useless build-up of long and complex treaties, and it would be good if these were to be re-written as one brief and readable framework treaty, which makes it clear to everyone what has been agreed so far.
At the same time, a case has been made in favour of a European Constitution, comprising this framework treaty as well as the Charter of Fundamental Rights and laying down the role of the European political groups.
Despite the recognition that the national identity of the Member States must be respected and that national citizenship need not be abolished, this report has a strong leaning towards a centralised European superstate according to the US model.
I gladly support an extension of the social fundamental rights and a structure of political decision-making which is understandable and accessible to all European citizens.
For this purpose, all we need is for the existing treaties to be rewritten and for the EU to sign the Council of Europe Convention on the protection of human rights and dignity of the human being which has been in existence for a long time.
The UK Labour Members of the PSE Group welcome this report without endorsing all of its detail.
We think a re-organising of the Treaties and their simplification would make it easier for citizens to see clearly the field of EU responsibilities - and their limits - as well as the procedures for exercising these responsibilities.
We welcome the idea that future changes, after Nice, could be prepared by a convention involving national parliaments, the European Parliament and government representatives, as recently tried, successfully, with the convention that prepared the Charter of Rights.
Ratification, however, must be up to each Member State in accordance with its own procedures and traditions.
We also do not wish to pre-empt this work by deciding now what should be in the new constitution, such as whether the Charter should be included.
We have a constitution already in the form of the Treaties, in so far as they lay down the competences of the Union, its procedures and the composition and powers of its institutions.
However they are not codified, they are unclear and they are insufficient as regards efficiency and democracy.
We welcome attempts to improve them.
I abstained from voting in the final vote.
I believe it is absolutely crucial that the EU' s Charter of Fundamental Rights should involve subscribing to the Council of Europe's Convention on Human Rights.
The word 'constitution' is intellectually and politically misleading.
Instead, the proper concept should instead be the 'recapitulation and simplification of the EU Treaties' .
The Swedish Christian Democrats do not believe that the Convention has proved to be a democratic or effective method of working when it comes to producing a Charter of Fundamental Rights.
That is true in terms of the understanding shown both of the national parliaments and their constitutional committees and of the European Parliament' s Committee on Constitutional Affairs.
In practice, the Convention' s presidency has produced its own summary of the views which the various participants are taken to have arrived at.
In the event of the Convention method being used in future, its task should be limited to that of acting as a focus group.
I voted enthusiastically for the report by our fellow Member, Olivier Duhamel, because it sounds the same note as the great voices and great expressions of resolve that have, step by step, advanced the course of European integration since the war.
But this particular voice, and this is significant, is a parliamentary voice, the voice of an institution that attests a little more each day to the authority of the peoples within the Union and its triangle of institutions.
Step by step, treaty by treaty, and we hope the Treaty of Nice will not belie this, the old nationalist attitudes within Europe are expanding out of these narrow confines leading to the creation of a world power in a world of giants.
Everyone here knows that Europe, its currency, its diplomacy, its security, its civilisation, its culture and its social model can only truly survive the splendid history of its peoples, but also the fruitless dissension between them, by becoming a federation of nation states with strong, coherent and respected institutions, enshrined in a European Constitution, towards which Mr Duhamel has paved the way.
Until the Treaty of Amsterdam in 1997, Europe was an intergovernmental super-syndicate.
With the Treaty of Amsterdam and the extension of the codecision procedure, the European Parliament has effectively set Europe on the road to political integration and supranationality.
If, tomorrow, the Union wishes to embrace Europe in its entirety, the geographical Europe, extending even beyond the next wave of enlargement, it will need institutions that are fully mature in political and democratic terms.
What history will remember of this year 2000, which some people find too dull, is that it saw the advancement and affirmation of the idea of a European Constitution, backed by the majority of Members of this Parliament, which led, today, to the adoption of the Duhamel report.
That is why we must fervently hope that the Nice Summit and the Intergovernmental Conference prove a success, so as to enable us, quite simply, to make further progress very rapidly.
Gil-Robles report (A5-0288/2000)
Mr President, ever since I have been a Member of the European Parliament, I have had sleepless nights worrying about whether I will succeed in contributing to a European law on pensions before my term expires.
So far it has not been possible because pensions do not come under the European Parliament's mandate!
However, Mr Gil-Robles' report is a help in this respect because it proposes that, for certain issues and sectors, some of the Member States of the European Union reach agreement upon joint actions.
I therefore hope that we will opt in the near future for closer cooperation between certain States - including Italy - so that we can adopt common rules for the management of pensions and workers' pension contributions.
Then I will be able to sleep peacefully once more.
Mr Fatuzzo, that is what we all hope!
The Swedish and Danish Social Democrats have today voted against José Maria Gil-Robles Gil-Delgado' s report on closer cooperation.
We agree with the general principles laid down by the report, to the effect that closer cooperation should be developed within the European Union' s institutional frameworks and that the political and legal conditions established by the Treaty of Amsterdam for introducing closer cooperation are aimed at limiting the risk of a breach of the ties of solidarity between the Member States and the risk of a disintegration in the common legal area.
We recognise that, where the pace and scope of European integration are concerned, a certain degree of differentiation within the process may be useful in so far as the common objectives are preserved and the differentiation is perceived as a tool used on an exceptional basis, in a transitional period and with due respect for the fact that it is entirely up to those countries which are not a part of the enhanced cooperation process to decide whether - and, in certain cases, when - they wish to accede to those areas covered by closer cooperation.
If we cannot vote in favour of the report, it is because we cannot support the proposed changes to the political and legal conditions required for closer cooperation.
Removing the conditions which state that closer cooperation must remain within the framework of the Treaty and removing the right of veto and the opportunity for bringing the issue up in the European Council would constitute a breach of the quite fundamental principles according to which European cooperation in the EU operates.
The Group for a Europe of Democracies and Diversities is voting against Gil-Robles Gil-Delgado' s report on enhanced cooperation.
The report proposes abolishing the right of veto, which would in reality mean that countries which are very keen on further integration could forge ahead without having broad democratic support.
The ulterior motive is to be able to continue the development towards 'ever closer union' without being hampered by the enlargement to which the EU countries have committed themselves.
Enhanced cooperation would cause most policies, including the most sensitive ones, to be centralised to a still greater degree than they are already.
In this way, Mr Gil-Robles proposes discontinuing the common foreign and security policy.
We consider, however, that future development will increase the need for far more varied and flexible cooperation in Europe.
To allow decisions on ever more important topics to be made on the basis of qualified majority voting would be in conflict with basic democratic standards.
Countries with a tradition of holding referendums before surrendering sovereignty may in future be in danger of finding themselves in a situation in which a proposal that is rejected nationally is adopted at EU level.
Those countries which are not so keen on integration are left with a poor alternative, namely that of copying the legislation without having any real say in it.
What they cannot do, however, is avoid the pioneer countries' legislation.
The Group for a Europe of Democracies and Diversities wants a freer and more flexible Europe in which there is no pressure to be involved in everything.
We want to see a Europe of democracies and diversity.
We are therefore voting against the report.
I voted against the Gil-Robles report on reinforced cooperation, i.e. cooperation that does not involve all but only some EU Member States.
In fact, although this report tends to introduce a little more flexibility into the highly inflexible system laid down by Title VII of the Treaty of Amsterdam, which is welcome, the final result is still far from adequate.
It reflects far too monolithic a concept of the Union, under which all forms of cooperation would have to operate within a 'single institutional framework' and would necessarily be directed towards the objective creating a super-state.
The Gil-Robles report even proposes bringing the common foreign and security policy and the common defence policy within the purview of reinforced cooperation, thus centralising those policies even more than they are at present (Paragraph 4).
These proposals are not acceptable; the need for cooperation within Europe is genuine, but also diverse and multiform, and it can no longer be locked into a uniform Community framework based on majority voting.
Furthermore, the report, and this is a significant omission, contains no explanation as to how cooperation procedures involving one third of Member States could actually be made to work within the existing institutions without reforming those institutions.
In reality, the European Parliament is practising delay tactics.
Parliament wished earlier to prevent the emergence of differentiated forms of cooperation in the Treaty of Amsterdam, but was finally forced to give way and accept 'reinforced cooperation' .
It is now attempting to prevent reinforced cooperation being made more flexible, but here too it will eventually lose.
We believe that what ought to be termed 'differentiated' cooperation procedures should not have to follow predetermined lines in their objectives; nor should there be limits on their creation or constraints on their operation.
Some procedures could use the Community framework should this be found desirable, others could create their own ad hoc institutions, linked to the Union only by a liaison secretariat.
Finally, differentiated cooperation should preferably operate on the basis of the unanimity principle, thus avoiding any relapse into the disadvantages of the Community method.
We should remember that the mechanism now known as reinforced cooperation already existed well before the Treaty of Amsterdam.
Indeed, some Member States that wanted to deepen their cooperation and go beyond the integration provided for in the Treaties developed various instruments, such as the Social Chapter, the Schengen Agreements, Economic and Monetary Union, etc.
This enabled them to advance at different rates and/or with different objectives.
With the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam, the use of these instruments was formalised by the introduction of the concept of 'closer cooperation' into the Treaty on European Union (Title VII) and the Treaty establishing the European Community (Article 11).
The objective of this form of cooperation is to allow a limited number of Member States that are able and willing to move forward to deepen European integration, provided they respect the European Union' s single institutional framework.
In fact, Europe is finding it more and more difficult to move forward at the same pace.
So we must avoid slowing down the general pace and therefore allow some Member States to move forward by developing the mechanism of reinforced cooperation.
Resorting to this instrument is tied to conditions designed to avoid turning the European Union into an à la carte or multi-speed Europe, a legitimate anxiety which lies at the heart of debates on this issue.
We must point out that reinforced cooperation, as provided for in the Treaty of Amsterdam, must in particular concern an area that does not come within the Community' s exclusive purview, must be aimed at furthering the objectives of the Union, must respect the principles of the Treaties and must be used only as a last resort while concerning a majority of Member States.
Reinforced cooperation could have an important role to play in the framework of an enlarged Europe.
However, as these provisions now stand, this mechanism cannot function correctly.
That is why the reform of this instrument has been entered on the agenda of the IGC with a view to making it easier to use.
The report before us tends to consolidate Parliament' s position in this respect (resolution of 13 April 2000).
In particular, that means abolishing the right of veto and making it possible to resort to cooperation when it concerns at least one third of Member States and also extending reinforced cooperation to the common foreign and security policy.
The rapporteur rightly stresses that the Commission' s power of initiative, the full participation of the European Parliament and legal control by the Court of Justice must be the rule for all forms of reinforced cooperation.
If used intelligently, this instrument can be a way out of the current deadlock affecting the European Union.
There has been much debate within the European Union in recent times concerning what is known as the principle of enhanced cooperation.
In its simplest terms, what this means is that larger Member States can integrate more closely and over a shorter time-frame than smaller Member States of the EU.
In essence, the proponents of such a policy want to put in place a two-tier Europe.
They want the European Union to be built at two different paces: one for countries that wish to integrate more closely and one for countries that want to tread more carefully on the issue of economic integration.
I do not think it will be a necessarily healthy move forward for the European Union if EU leaders were to accept and implement the principle of enhanced cooperation to its fullest.
I believe that this would fly in the face of both the founding objectives and spirit of the Treaty of Rome and of all subsequent Treaties thereafter.
One should recall that the Single European Act in 1987 laid the groundwork for the implementation of an internal market.
Large scale EU Structural Funds were put aside to help Objective 1 countries within the European Union so as to guarantee that these countries could become more competitive over time.
EU leaders stated that they did not want an internal market of only a few countries. They wanted all participating countries within the European Union to actively engage in a competitive manner within the environment of a new single market.
That is why the large allocation of EU Structural Funds was made.
The operating structures of the internal market have been a success ever since the early 1990s.
This principle of equality between poorer and richer nations was transcended into policies that were implemented to put in place a new European single currency regime.
Once again, if poorer and smaller countries of the European Union could not reform their economic structures they would not be able to meet the economic convergence criterion as laid down in the Maastricht Treaty.
EU leaders financed large-scale EU Structural Funds and Cohesion Fund programmes for smaller and poorer countries so that as many countries as possible could participate in the European single currency structure.
There is a need for institutional equality in the context of the negotiations on the forthcoming Intergovernmental Conference.
The influence of smaller Member States cannot be dissipated by a set of larger countries within the EU that seek to implement, as I have said, the principle of enhanced cooperation.
This would not be healthy for the European Union now and into the future.
It certainly would not be healthy in the context of the impending enlargement of the European Union itself.
We are broadly in favour of so-called flexible integration.
By allowing a group of countries to go ahead and deepen cooperation within a particular area and, at the same time, preventing one or more Member States from curbing flexible integration, then integration throughout the European Union can go forwards.
As long as the European Union' s common objectives are promoted within the framework of flexible integration and as long as no Member State is excluded from participating, we believe that this is a positive solution and ought to be developed.
If, in a future EU with 25 to 30 Member States, the situation is to be avoided of a Europe à la carte in which the unity of the Member States is in danger of disintegrating, we nonetheless believe that at least half of all Member States must participate in flexible integration.
We are also opposed to creating duplicate defence structures within the EU and consequently to flexible integration within the EU' s foreign and security policy.
Following the EU' s failure in the Balkans, it is incredibly important that the EU as a whole should have the ability to act in its own immediate vicinity and be able to make personnel and resources available in time for conflict management and peace-keeping measures.
The WEU' s institutional and operational structures ought to be fully integrated into the common security policy.
The EU must acquire a credible foreign policy.
We cannot rely upon the United States forever more.
At the same time, it is important to retain the United States' s continued commitment, and we do not want the EU to develop a parallel mini NATO.
Still less do we wish to see a limited number of Member States go further within the framework of flexible integration in this area.
It is therefore important to retain the transatlantic link, even if there might, of course, be better coordination and a better distribution of labour.
We believe that, in the future too, a credible common European foreign policy must be developed within the rules that apply at present.
Decisions ought to be taken by majority vote, but the option of a constructive veto, whereby a country may choose to remain outside a particular process but not prevent others from pressing ahead, ought to remain.
I welcome Mr Gil-Robles' report on reinforced cooperation.
While reluctantly accepting that in an enlarged European Union there will be a need for an 'avant-garde' I agree with Mr Gil-Robles that there are some essential conditions that must be fulfilled:
Reinforced cooperation must be developed within the institutional framework of the Union.
It must preserve the single institutional framework within which all MEPs and all Commissioners participate fully in the exercise of the functions of each institution.
The procedure for activating reinforced cooperation should be the same for all pillars and should be based on the existing procedure for the first pillar, with the few modifications set out in Mr Gil-Robles' report.
If reinforced cooperation proves necessary I am convinced that only the Community system offers the necessary guarantees in terms of democratic control, legal controls and solidarity.
European cooperation can be useful in solving cross-border problems.
What could be more natural, therefore, than cooperation between neighbouring states, such as the cooperation which existed before the founding of the European Union in the form of the Benelux counties and the cooperation between the Nordic states?
Such cooperation between neighbours is often preferential to expensive, impenetrable EU structures which are also difficult for the electorate to influence.
Not one single EU rule should stand in the way of far-reaching cooperation, subject this to conditions or require that others join in.
That is why I am in favour of a minimum number of rules and limitations affecting reinforced cooperation between neighbours, as long as such cooperation is not intended to disadvantage third parties.
In practice, we can already see Euro countries and non-Euro countries emerging within the EU.
They are not leader groups but reflect a diversity which, with 30 Member States, will only increase.
That is why it is better to take inter-parliamentary cooperation and the right to diversity as a guiding principle throughout the EU: the Commission submits proposals, Parliament makes the final decision and national parliaments decide whether the Member States endorse that decision.
The UK Labour members of the PES Group welcome the adoption of their contribution to the ongoing work of the IGC on reinforced cooperation, without endorsing every single detail.
Clearly the triggering of reinforced cooperation must be made easier in an enlarged Union.
It must be used sparingly and must remain open to those who do not initially participate.
It must not undermine the existing core of common policies and commitments.
It must take place within the existing institutional structure.
On these key principles we are in agreement with the report even if the details will require further refinement in the IGC.
I abstained from voting in the final vote.
The Swedish Christian Democrats do not believe that military issues should be accommodated within closer cooperation.
At the same time, I believe that the issue of reducing the proportion of Member States able to enter into closer cooperation from a half to a third of the Member States, as well as the question of removing the veto, are really not ready to be discussed until enlargement towards the East has been completed.
The new Member States ought at that time to be given the opportunity to participate in drawing up the regulations governing closer cooperation.
Sudre report (A5-0285/2000)
Mr President, Mrs Sudre' s report is indeed of great importance, and even capital importance for the outermost regions, but my group, the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance, abstained and I should like to explain why.
The problems raised by the report have been identified; there is no further need to go into the details.
The Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance is disappointed, however, disappointed that the report did not seize the opportunity to bring about environmentally, socially and culturally sustainable development in these regions and that the amendments adopted during the vote are not such as to improve the text in that respect.
We regret that the positions Parliament has adopted in the vote are the European Union' s positions concerning these regions.
In particular, the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance regrets the report' s rather defensive attitude to the ACP and candidate countries.
The Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance is also opposed to granting permanent derogations.
We are in favour of applying the principle of derogation to the common policies applied in the outermost regions on a case-by-case basis.
I am thinking here of state aid and fiscal policies.
We regret the fact that the call to moderate the 'polluter pays' principle was endorsed, for that could open the door to misuse in the application of this specific prerogative.
We also regret the lack of any reference to, or even mention of, the need to protect biodiversity, which is one of the most important assets of the outermost regions.
These regions could act as a wonderful laboratory in terms of sustainable development.
That is another missed opportunity.
On the other hand, we welcome the paragraphs in the report on promoting renewable energies and monitoring industrial activities which cause pollution.
You sit next to me when we vote. I was very happy to vote for this report, which I am sure that you will have supported, as you always support all the measures concerning the Canary Islands.
The Pensioners' Party and the pensioners who support it are very familiar with these islands for they are a key tourist destination.
It is my opinion that the European Union should be more attentive and more active than it has been up till now with regard to the Azores, the Canary Islands, Guyana, Martinique, Madeira and Reunion.
These islands must be able to feel that they are an active part of the European Union, and I hope that the Union will turn them into a paradise both for tourists and for their inhabitants.
The European Parliament and especially the Group of the European People' s Party and European Democrats has always helped push the outermost region concept to the forefront.
This was the case in the Gutiérrez Díaz report, the Fernández Martín report, which promoted the inclusion of the concept in the Treaty, and now in the Sudre report, which restates European policy for the outermost regions.
In the face of the Commission' s hesitancy and contradictions, due to which REGIS has disappeared, the review of POSEI has been postponed and the corresponding funding has been reduced, the Sudre report comes at a highly appropriate moment.
The European Parliament is reasserting itself by adopting measures in various fields - from agriculture to fisheries, from the environment to transport and energy via the information society - with the necessary budgetary support.
At the same time, production sectors stand out, which in the case of the Azores means that the dairy and sugar disputes must be resolved.
In this context I quote Paragraph 7 of the Sudre report: "[The European Parliament] believes that specific adaptations of the common policies must be developed where the outermost regions are heavily dependent on a limited number of economic activities or even on a single economic activity, in conformity with Article 299(2) of the Treaty."
We now look forward to initiatives from the Commission and from the national and regional authorities.
(FR) The rather bureaucratic term 'outermost regions' encompasses women and men from New Caledonia, Guadeloupe, Martinique, French Guiana, Reunion, Mayotte, Saint Pierre and Miquelon, Polynesia, Wallis and Futuna and all our territories in the Pacific, the Indian Ocean and the Atlantic, which form a bridge of intelligence, solidarity and beauty between Europe and other continents and other civilisations.
The Europe of Brussels, with its mania for levelling out and standardising, has acted unfairly and even stupidly towards our compatriots who live according to European values thousands of kilometres away from Paris, Madrid or Lisbon.
The technocrats, the European judges, wanted to abolish the 'dock dues' , which provide resources for our municipalities in the French overseas departments and, in particular, protect our traditional workforce.
From this distance, Brussels has put our Martinique rums, our rice and our tropical fruits at risk.
Most especially, this has resulted in the planned destruction of our banana industry, in Guadeloupe, Martinique, Madeira and the Canaries.
The European Commission has kow-towed to the banana multinationals.
Every year, EUR 2 billion in customs duties are given away to Chiquita and Del Monte.
How then can we refuse to give our remote departments and territories the funding they need to make up for the costs involved in transportation, dealing with cyclones and investing in universities or hospitals?
When our regions, in the West Indies for example, or the Pacific, are tax havens used by the American multinationals, from Kodak to Microsoft, Boeing or Cargill, for massive tax-fraud exports, then the right to geographically equal competition, together with the right of all Europeans to equality, requires that we devote part of the European budget, in which taxes make up 17% of revenue, to developing the economic, social and cultural life of our compatriots who live in regions that may well be outermost in terms of geography but are central in terms of civilisation.
The fact that the outermost regions exist is tied up to a large degree with colonial history.
In the Middle Ages, those regions and their people did not belong to Europe, and even today, they are not really considered to be European.
Even before the nineteenth century, Spain, Portugal, France, England and the Netherlands had already conquered substantial colonial empires and Belgium, Germany, Denmark and Italy tried to follow in their footsteps for a short while.
This colonial era has now passed.
The suppressed peoples have fought for their freedom, or were given their independence as a preventive measure, because the former rulers had no appetite for a war of liberation which they would end up losing.
All that the EU Member States have left outside Europe in terms of territory are small or sparsely populated sections of their former colonial empire.
The EU Member States deal with their outermost regions in very different ways.
Spain and Portugal consider their islands in the Atlantic as remote regions.
Those islands can, given their present composition of population and their relative proximity, be considered normal parts of their countries.
Similarly, the Netherlands and Denmark each have two regions in, or on the other side of, the Atlantic, but those areas are expressly not included in the European Union.
France, on the other hand, owns overseas departments in the Indian Ocean and the Caribbean.
This proposal has confronted my group with a difficult choice.
On the one hand, we want to support disadvantaged areas in and outside of Europe so that they achieve the same standard of living and level of amenities that is now current in the EU.
That is a question of solidarity.
On the other hand, we have serious doubts as to whether or not former colonies should be declared outermost regions.
A case can be made for the Spanish and Portuguese islands, but not really for the more remote regions.
These should ideally be given the same status as the current ACP states which, after the same kind of history, have ended up in a different type of relationship with Europe.
In assessing the amendments, my group has tried to tread a middle path between the most far-reaching demands of those protecting the interests of the outermost regions and the indifference towards, or even repugnance for, this topic felt in Member States which cannot relate to it in any way.
In any case, we have, however, subordinated our repugnance for this topic' s colonial backdrop to the interests of those living in the regions concerned.
This report is very timely, given the need to put Article 299(2) of the Treaty on European Union objectively and swiftly into practice, and I essentially support its positions on the sustainable development of the outermost regions.
The special characteristics of these regions derive in general from their island status and their distance from continental Europe, but also from their chronic dependence on only a few products or even a single product, and thus require specific measures designed to overcome these constraints.
I am therefore delighted that the report has adopted positions which to a great extent include the proposals I submitted to the Parliamentary Committee.
I must also stress, however, that insufficient attention is given in the report to certain particular social situations that exist in these regions or in some of them, which would also require special measures.
This could be rectified through the approval of a draft amendment that we tabled for this purpose in due time.
Bowis report (A5-0272/2000)
Mr President, the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance has indeed voted for Mr Bowis' report and, while we welcome the fact that the European Parliament and the Commission, with its White Paper, are offering European consumers interesting prospects, food safety must remain an absolute priority in our policies.
Let us not be too ambitious, however.
The more progress that is made in scientific research, the more new questions are raised.
We need only look at developments involving BSE.
New cases are being identified week after week and in new geographical areas that had been spared in the past.
This applies in particular to the Vosges department in the Lorraine region.
With all the measures proposed in the White Paper, we will still have to flesh out a number of points in order to guarantee food safety and in particular restore consumer confidence.
The most important points include the creation of the European Food Safety Agency, which we welcome and of which we expect a great deal.
It is vital to its credibility that it is independent.
This authority must be totally dissociated from the interests of private companies or the Member States.
That independence also implies financial independence.
The Union will have to free up funds to run it, but will the EFSA be enough to reassure consumers who are worried about what they find on their plates and will soon find in their drinks?
The authority will have to be set up by 2002/2003 and we very much hope that the question of where it will have its headquarters will not be an obstacle to its establishment.
Meanwhile, the Union must continue to assess and manage food safety risks.
That means it must be vigilant day in day out.
It means guaranteeing that the policy-makers and the policies that have been put in place really do deal with what people want.
The use of animal meal, which is triggering a new food crisis, is unacceptable.
Henceforth we must ban all animal meal.
That is the strong stance our citizens expect, rather than the kind of tolerance that can end up seriously damaging consumer health.
This kind of recognised scientific risk must not be tolerated in any way.
Mr Bowis' report takes that line.
That is why the Green Group fully supported his work and voted for the report.
Mr President, I apologise to the Presidency and to the interpreters, who have to listen to this last explanation of vote and, in particular, I sympathise with the translators of our explanations of votes, particularly, in my case, the Italian translator, Ornella Buson.
I will endeavour to take as little advantage as possible of this right to explanation, but I would like to say that I too voted for the report on the establishment of the Food Safety Agency.
The reason why the report is important is clear, especially when I remember that one of my neighbours was taken into hospital one day with acute stomach pains, after eating poisonous mushrooms which he had not had checked out by the relevant person.
Mr John Bowis' report will ensure that the food we eat is always healthy, natural and safe.
You said that this would be the last time you would speak, Mr Fatuzzo, but you must just have meant for today!
I was a little worried!
Mr President, I voted for Mr Bowis' report and of course I want to emphasise the high quality of the work done by our rapporteur.
Let me say how glad I am that our Parliament is finally delivering its opinion on such an important subject, while regretting that it has been 10 months since the European Commission presented its White Paper on 12 January this year.
It was essential for us to give an opinion on an issue that is so important to our fellow citizens.
Our vote has thus clarified the composition of the future European Agency, while also setting out our specific requirements regarding its funding and its independence.
I hope that the Commission will, therefore, take the European Parliament' s demands on board.
This first step must not close our eyes to the serious work that still needs to be done on risk management, developing and improving the Rapid Alert System, but also on ensuring traceability and public information.
Far from representing a final stage, the report must therefore signal the start of a huge undertaking, namely the essential and rapid reworking of our legislation on food.
At first glance, the Commission's White Paper on food safety appears to be full of good intentions, since it mainly proposes the creation of a European Food Safety Agency responsible for managing a rapid alert network and totally independent when it advises the management authorities.
But on reading the report or perusing the European Parliament's resolution on the same subject, the picture becomes far less pleasing.
In fact it becomes clear that the purpose of the agency is to take over national defence powers, or to paralyse them, and to put them at the service of the Commission's objectives.
Now that is absolutely intolerable.
The French must remember that despite the Commission's splendid declarations about its resolve "to assure the highest standards of food safety" in the Union, it is actually the Commission, and none other, that is giving precedence to the demands of the free movement of products over public health requirements; it is the Commission, and none other, that has, for example, just dragged France before the Court of Justice for maintaining its ban on British beef.
It is unacceptable that we should abandon any part of our national right of decision and right of protection, in relation to food safety questions.
However, the creation of that agency is imperceptibly guiding us in that very direction.
First of all, we must remember that the power to provide advice plays a capital part.
In the mad cow affair, the reason the French Government continued the ban was because it was backed up by the independent opinion of the French Food Safety Agency (AFSSA), even though the supposedly scientific European committee saw nothing wrong with allowing British meat to be imported into France.
Consequently, if a European agency is necessary, it must be complementary to the national agencies and in no way reduce their legitimacy.
That is not at all the direction taken by the White Paper, which wants to make the European agency into a "scientific point of reference for the whole Union" (page 5).
Secondly, the European agency must be completely independent.
The director of the agency should certainly not be appointed by the Commission, contrary to what the European Parliament is proposing (paragraph 21 of the resolution).
Nor should the Commission appoint the scientific experts, even following what appears to be a rigorous selection procedure.
Moreover, the agency must be able to criticise the Commission itself.
That is not at all the view of the White Paper, which calls for the agency to develop very close working links with the Commission services because, as it explains with a certain aplomb, "it will allow the Authority (Agency) to be responsive to the needs of the Commission services" (page 20).
Thirdly, the Agency must not encroach upon the management of risks and regulatory power.
The Commission's White Paper has the grace to admit that, but on closer perusal we find that the regulatory power it is so keen to protect is that of... the Commission, and not the states.
That does not prevent the Commission and Parliament from christening the agency a "European Authority", a title totally contrary to the philosophy that supposedly inspires it.
The European Parliament even adds, in paragraph 6 of its resolution, the phrase "while subjecting the powers to be transferred to detailed scrutiny", just when we thought that no powers were to be transferred.
We therefore believe that the White Paper and Parliament's report are traps, which is why we are opposed to them.
The Member States must retain full responsibility for food safety, because they are close to their people and will react more rapidly than the Commission, which, moreover is constantly blinded by its free-trade prejudices.
There is without doubt a need for an agency that takes a European view of the situation, but it must be strictly consultative and totally independent.
The best idea would be for it to emanate solely from the national agencies and to network with them.
A serious problem for society and food safety has been caused by the serious crises and scandals involving food products that have arisen in several countries in the European Union because of the use of methods aimed at making the maximum profit from food-producing activities at any cost, ignoring the interests of consumers.
Therefore all the measures proposed to change the situation and protect consumers deserve our support, particularly the setting-up of a European food Safety Agency to analyse the risks scientifically, working in close collaboration with existing national agencies in this field and the main European consumers' organisations.
But we need to go further than this.
We have to bear in mind the type of practices employed in farming and the food industry, the problem of imported foodstuffs, the composition of the ingredients of animal feedingstuffs, the maximum levels of dioxins and pesticide residues, food additives and other matters, giving priority to food safety.
It is equally crucial that we support regional crops and products, family farming and rural development.
Today, the question of food safety has become a primary concern of the citizens of our countries.
The issue has now become particularly acute, not just because of the advances in our methods of scientific investigation but mainly because the consequences of a certain type of farming aimed at boosting productivity at all costs and inspired by a free-trade philosophy have come fully to light.
So today we need to correct the adverse effects on public health of a policy very largely inspired by the Commission, as Mrs Thomas-Mauro quite rightly pointed out this morning.
The question is what kind of mechanism will protect our citizens most effectively.
If we take a look at recent events, we find that with regard to BSE, for example, and taking only the case of France, it is the existence of a competent and independent national Food Safety Agency that allowed the French authorities to rapidly take the decisions needed to protect the health of its people.
But the contribution of the European institutions has, so far, been singularly negative.
First there was the refusal by the Council and the Commission to take on board the French scientists' warnings, and we now see how relevant they were.
Next came the incredible ruling by the Court of Justice against maintaining the ban on British beef, which France had decided at the express recommendation of the scientists.
So that shows that the European institutions' behaviour on this issue that is vital to the food safety of our fellow citizens comes down to genuinely putting the health of Europeans at risk.
There is a lesson to be learned.
In the name of respect for subsidiarity and effectiveness, we must give pride of place to measures taken in a national context, where independent agencies can rapidly provide genuinely scientific opinions undiluted by other considerations and the political authorities can take the necessary risk-management decisions for the benefit of the people who have given them a mandate to protect their safety.
Under these circumstances, a European agency can play a useful role if it really is independent, especially in relation to the Commission services and the various pressure groups at work there, and if its role is to complement and support the national agencies (from which it should emanate), in particular by acting as a forum for the exchange of expertise.
That is not at all what the Bowis report is proposing; it gives the impression that basically it regards food safety as another pretext for fuelling the well-known process of strengthening the Commission's powers at the expense of the national authorities and public safety.
In fact, without batting an eyelid the report endorses the new wording the Commission wants: we are no longer talking about a European agency but about an authority.
The report seems to regard it as a matter of course that the Commission should appoint the director of the authority: no doubt that is the best way of guaranteeing its independence!
It has no problem with the location of the authority in Brussels: so it will be right next to the Commission services and therefore perfectly "responsive" (sic) to its wishes, as recommended in the White Paper...
On the other hand, the authority must be "given powers to require" Member States to provide reports, statistics and papers...
As for paragraph 6 of the report, it quite classically announces the transfers of powers that are bound to follow.
Looking behind the apparent and certainly sincere concern to improve food safety in Europe, in fact we thus find ourselves faced with the usual logic: the aim is to get control over the Member States, in this sphere as in the others, to strip the national authorities of their powers and effectiveness and hand them over to a large, limp and flabby European institution, theoretically independent but in reality controlled by the Commission and its philosophy of absolutely free trade.
The only power the European Food Safety Agency will have is to conduct the scientific analysis of food risks, but not the political management of these risks.
We must certainly restrict its powers.
In any case, we would have preferred an "agency".
In charge, in the long term, of running the Rapid Alert System (RAS), which collects the information held by the Member States or the European Commission, it will in due course be responsible for coordinating the national agencies.
We distrust this term, which suggests the perfect little bureaucrat, with the authority handing down orders to harmonise.
Is it not the intention, in due course, to entrust the authority with managing the food safety aspect of the RAS?
That is why I abstained.
For my part, in France, I do not need an authority in order to restore my confidence;
I trust the French Food Safety Agency and its opinions, especially in relation to mad cow disease.
We voted for Amendment No 15 because we are very strongly committed to defending the European cultural heritage in relation to locally produced food.
However, we fear that the stated means of ensuring the protection of locally produced food would be counterproductive.
For are licensing and product certification not in fact a way of circumventing the principle set out at the beginning of recital I?
Small local producers will be unable to gain access because this certification is so cumbersome, complex and costly.
We voted against Amendment No 7 because it would mean, even now, going beyond the field of risk assessment and encompassing risk management.
It is not up to the authority to advise the states to adopt this or that type of control procedure.
That is outside its remit.
(The sitting was suspended at 2.05 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m.)
Honk Kong SAR
The next item is the report (A5-0284/2000) by Mr Cushnahan, on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy, on the first and second annual reports by the European Commission on the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (COM(98)796 - C4-0100/1999 - 1999/2009(COS)) (COM(2000) 294 - C5-0500/2000 - 1999/2009(COS)).
Mr President, Hong Kong went to the polls in September, for the second time since the former British colony was returned to Chinese rule.
Analysis of the results reveals disturbing trends which demonstrate that all is not well.
Voter turn-out dropped to 43% compared to 53% in 1998 and support for the region's pro-Beijing parties increased in marked contrast to the decline in support for the pro-democracy parties.
I believe there are a number of reasons why Hong Kong voters have opted for apathy instead of exercising their newly established right to vote.
The main problem is that while the election procedure itself is free and transparent it can hardly be described as truly democratic.
Twenty-four of the 60 seats are directly elected on the basis of universal suffrage, where three million Hong Kong citizens have the right to vote.
The remaining 36 seats are returned by a mere 179 000 electors drawn from Hong Kong's powerful business and professional interests as well as pro-Beijing groups.
Furthermore the legislature has little real power.
The real power rests with the Chief Executive, Tung Chee-hwa and his government which, in effect, is appointed by Beijing.
The executive is totally separate from the legislature, which is left to operate more like a watchdog rather than a real decision-making body.
The legislature's lack of real power has made voters unenthusiastic about participating in elections which, in their view, are not truly democratic.
Although the Basic Law - which is Hong Kong's mini-constitution - lays down specific criteria for the holding of the 2004 election, it does nonetheless provide for the possible introduction of universal suffrage for the election of all 60 seats for the 2008 election.
However, such a step is resisted by some who clearly wish to protect the power of big business.
Even if universal suffrage were to be introduced - preferably sooner rather than later - it would not solve all the current problems.
It would need to be accompanied by a reform to the Special Administrative Region's political institutions.
The executive has no party base in the legislature, which means that these two institutions are effectively completely separate from one another.
Furthermore, because the executive is not really accountable to the elected representatives and because the latter lack real power, they are also not held accountable for their own political pronouncements and actions.
Consideration must be given to changing the respective rules of the executive and the legislature to ensure an operational inter-relationship.
Other matters need to be examined.
They could include the method of appointment of principal officials: should they be political appointments or civil servants, and how they should be held accountable by elected representatives?
As well as problems in this area there is also growing concern regarding increasing Chinese interference in Hong Kong's affairs.
The rule of law is the cornerstone of the "one country, two systems" policy.
Three recent, controversial legal cases have far-reaching implications for the integrity of the rule of law and ultimately for the autonomy of Hong Kong itself.
Two of these resulted in the execution of individuals for crimes they had committed in Hong Kong, where capital punishment is banned.
The third case related to a judgment handed down by Hong Kong's Court of Final Appeal on a controversial immigration law concerning residency rights in Hong Kong for children of Chinese parents who themselves had resident status in Hong Kong.
The Hong Kong Government was displeased with the liberal judgment and invited the Chinese authorities to reinterpret the Basic Law.
Many observers consider that this has created a worrying precedent, which appears to enable China to issue interpretations of the Basic Law whenever local courts make decisions of which either the Hong Kong Government or mainland politicians disapprove.
This situation was further compounded by mainland officials trying to interfere in press freedom and Hong Kong's trading relationship with Taiwan, following the recent Taiwanese election.
As regards my comments on the dominance of the Li Ka-shing family - which was the subject of much media interest in Hong Kong today - in some sectors of Hong Kong's economy, I should like to point out that the reason I have raised this matter is that it has been raised with me by leading figures in Hong Kong and indeed was the subject of major media debate during a recent visit there by myself.
I should also like to raise the question of visa-free access.
I am very unhappy that this has been blocked by some governments.
If we really believe in the "one country, two systems" approach then this is the one way of underpinning it.
Visa-free access should be given to Hong Kong's passport-holders without any preconditions.
So far I have concentrated on the negative aspects.
While these events give cause for concern I would not be unduly pessimistic regarding Hong Kong's future.
The "one country, two systems" remains reasonably intact, but, the real problem is that if the "one country, two systems" is seen to fail then the China-Taiwan problem will be even more difficult to resolve.
In conclusion I should like to thank all those who were involved in the deliberations on this report: my colleagues in the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy, and members of the Foreign Affairs Secretariat, especially Mrs Opacic, and the Commissioner.
. (NL) Mr President, as draftsman of the opinion of my committee, I would like to highlight the importance of Hong Kong in terms of international trade.
Back in 1997, Hong Kong was ranked eighth in the list of major world trading powers and tenth in the list of European Union trading partners.
Since then, and despite the Asian financial crisis, trade relations between the European Union and Hong Kong have gone from strength to strength.
As far as relations between Hong Kong and its international trading partners are concerned, more specifically the World Trade Organisation, the EU and Hong Kong share a number of common goals and the two work very closely together, which is useful in the light of the forthcoming trade round.
In my recommendation, I referred to the important role which Hong Kong could play when China joined the World Trade Organisation.
Hong Kong could show China how an open, fully integrated market can play a leading role in the region and can in this way achieve economic development and sustained growth.
Moreover, since Hong Kong constitutes a major sales market for China, Hong Kong can exercise influence on economic reform in China.
For these reasons, we must stress the importance of closer cooperation between the European Union and Hong Kong in financial terms and in terms of trade and direct foreign investments.
Hong Kong has concluded many bilateral agreements over the past few years.
We should bear in mind that in the framework of the EU-China agreement with regard to the possible accession of China to the World Trade Organisation, these bilateral agreements will need to be reviewed.
Although, economically speaking, we are right to term the relationship with Hong Kong a success, I should highlight a number of drawbacks, including the fact that the protection of intellectual property rights remains a huge problem.
Our companies are still being faced with violations of copyright and the manufacture and sale of counterfeit products.
We also have concerns in the social field.
After all, working conditions reportedly leave a great deal to be desired, especially vis-à-vis immigrant workers.
As far as the inquiry is concerned, we must call for both Hong Kong and the European Union to play a valuable role in the many projects which are in the pipeline.
I should like to start by congratulating the rapporteur, Mr Cushnahan, on his excellent work on such an important matter.
I am delighted to see that Commissioner Patten, for whose attitude and efficiency as governor of Hong Kong I have a great deal of respect, is here with us today.
I should like to dwell for a moment on two points which I believe are important, as of course are so many others.
The first is purely legal.
We must, I think, all agree that if, with measures such as those quoted in the Cushnahan report, we touch on the principle of the rule of law which should inform the legal and constitutional framework of Hong Kong, then we question the wider principle of "one country, two systems" on which developments in Hong Kong have been based.
And the second point which I wish to raise concerns the risks threatening the freedom of the press.
It is of paramount importance to the proper development of the principle of "one country, two systems", which constituted a revolution, as it were, in international relations because it introduced a new doctrine, to have, to protect and to respect freedom of the press.
Why?
Because it is through freedom of the press that observations and proposals are made which aim to keep things within the democratic framework on which we are all agreed.
Mr President, I would also like to congratulate Mr Cushnahan on his report.
I should like to thank him for once again being so adaptable in writing that report and being prepared to involve his colleagues so that there is no need for us to go through a lengthy amendment procedure because we reached consensus when the report was being drawn up.
Once again we see the handover of power in Hong Kong has generally gone very well and has defeated some of the more pessimistic forecasts.
Clearly, demonstrations still take place on a weekly basis in Hong Kong, movements are permitted in Hong Kong which are not permitted in China, the economy has survived a difficult period and continues to thrive and, as Mr De Clercq has said, the WTO membership for China should actually be an opportunity for Hong Kong, given its tremendous power in financial services in particular, and given that much of Hong Kong manufacturing has already moved to China.
However, as Mr Cushnahan has pointed out, there are areas of concern and they are set out well in his report so I do not need to go through them.
But I may quote one or two examples.
The Chinese news agency telling Mrs Anson Chan and the civil servants they had to better support the Chief Executive seems to me like interference in the affairs of another country.
The various reports of businessmen being put under pressure not to trade with Taiwan is also cause for concern.
The recent sacking or movement of one of the directors of Radio Television Hong Kong appears to have been as a result of pressure from the mainland.
All of these things in themselves may not add up to a great deal because they are part of a normal power struggle that you would see, provided, that is, that what Hong Kong was based on was a thriving, democratic system that could resist those sorts of pressures.
But we have to be concerned that in Hong Kong democracy is not going the way that we would have liked.
We have already heard of the unfair nature of the election system.
We will note, as was pointed out recently in the Financial Times by an adviser to the former Governor, the extent to which the rules were pushed back in 1997.
But when you see someone like Christine Loh resigning because there is no point in being in the legislative any more that, to me, is a significant signal that things are not going well.
And when someone who works for the Chief Executive is accused of interfering in opinion polls, that also bodes ill for the future.
It is not just a question of point scoring, a lot of modernisation is needed in Hong Kong.
That will only come about if there is a consensus and the top-down government in Hong Kong at the moment is ill-equipped to build consensus within Hong Kong.
While we recognise there has been a smooth transition, there remain areas we have to watch.
I would hope that we can continue with these annual reports and these Parliament reports so that we can monitor very closely the situation in Hong Kong.
Mr President, I too would like to add my words of congratulations to John Cushnahan on this report.
I envy him the opportunity of having been able to draw it up
If I take issue with anything in this report, it is purely on a matter of balance and perspective.
It is a question of whether one regards the glass as being half full, or as being half empty.
Mr Cushnahan rightly points to the question of the three legal cases which have caused concern.
He rightly points to the lack of progress on the introduction of universal suffrage for the elections of the Chief Executive, to discrimination against companies with trading links with Taiwan and to the decline in confidence of the political system.
These are all indeed serious challenges and if we must be grateful that things have gone as well as they have, we must nonetheless be concerned that greater progress has not been made.
If we believe, as I do, that the biggest challenge of the 21st century is the democratisation of China, then of course Hong Kong is a fascinating experiment.
I should be interested if the Commissioner would report to us something of the summit that Mr Prodi had with the Chinese last weekend and whether Hong Kong came up in those discussions.
Democracy and the rule of law will not be achieved and sustained unless the West is determined to make its voice heard.
I believe that the record of the European Union falls far behind that of the United States of America in this area.
I am aware that our Member States have concerns about standing up against the Chinese on issues of human rights because they fear trade sanctions in retaliation. But if there is one area where western Europe could stand four-square behind the European banner, it is surely in this area.
We must have a record on human rights which is as good as that of the United States.
The ASEM summit last week managed to agree a statement which included as a goal of Asia-Europe cooperation the promotion of human rights.
That is progress but we must look to the Commission for much more active involvement in this area; the fruits of such an approach will be enjoyed nowhere more than in Hong Kong.
Mr President, our group has read the report by Mr Cushnahan with approval and due appreciation.
In addition to overall satisfaction with regard to the functioning of the 'one country, two systems' policy, we too call for permanent vigilance which is in order following the worrying incidents.
We are the first to express our anxiety with regard to the Hong Kong government' s decision to apply for an interpretation of the 1990 Basic Law from the Standing Committee of the National People' s Congress.
The veto right which China could obtain as a result of this with regard to court rulings in Hong Kong puts a question mark over the legal autonomy of the Special Administrative Region.
This is all the more worrying because the Hong Kong Government is not based on a democratically elected majority.
The elections for the Legislative Council a month ago were once again proof of the democratic deficit.
The electorate displayed their contempt for the system, in which only 24 of the 60 seats were filled by directly elected members.
This partly explains the disappointing turn-out of 43.6%.
The fact that an electoral college of 800 members subsequently decided on the occupation of six seats and the fact that only 175 000 businesspeople were entitled to elect the other half of parliament turned the elections into a complete farce.
In this way, not only is the chasm between rich and poor sustained, it is also widened.
We therefore opted for the swift introduction of direct elections by no later than 2008, at which time there will no longer be any legal restrictions.
Finally, we would call for permanent vigilance with regard to the freedom of press, the need for laws with regard to fair competition and the possibility of an open trade relationship with Hong Kong and Taiwan.
On that basis, we would recommend a stimulating trade policy vis-à-vis Hong Kong.
I am delighted to be able to comment on this report and to commend the excellent work done by my honourable friend, John Cushnahan.
He and I are old friends and, more importantly, old friends of Hong Kong.
Both of us speak with - what I could describe with an understatement as - a degree of knowledge of that remarkable community.
It has been a short debate, but we have heard some excellent and well-informed speeches.
I was grateful for the kind things that the honourable gentleman, Mr Dimitrakopoulos, said about my time in Hong Kong.
I agree with him about the importance of the freedom of speech and a vigorous media and, judging by my experiences last week, the media does remain - at least the written media - extremely vigorous.
The honourable gentleman, Mr Watson, referred to the fact that we should not feel inhibited in what we say about Hong Kong or about other issues by our trading relationship with China.
I am always surprised when people put the contrary point of view, not least because on the most recent figures, China had a EUR 30 billion trade surplus with the European Union.
In the first six months of this year, the surplus was EUR 20 billion and looks like becoming EUR 40 billion for the whole year, so one needs to keep questions of trade in perspective, to put it very gently.
It is a happy coincidence that the debate is taking place today, since I was in Hong Kong last week.
It was my third visit since I relinquished the post of governor and my first full working visit as a Commissioner.
I can report first hand to the House that while, as several honourable gentlemen have pointed out, some problems exist, Hong Kong nevertheless remains a free society, undoubtedly one of the freest societies in Asia as both the Commission and Parliament's annual reports make clear.
The secret of Hong Kong's great success has always been its fusion of Hong Kong-Chinese entrepreneurial culture with the attributes of a free and open society founded on the rule of law.
The concept of one country, two systems enshrined in the joint declaration is designed to maintain that special mix - a mix between independent judiciary, clean civil service, zero tolerance of corruption, free press on the one hand and market economics on the other.
As both our reports make clear, so far, on the whole, it is managing to maintain the mix and I share the view in the honourable gentleman's report that the fundamentals of the arrangement remain reasonably intact.
We must remember that Hong Kong has been through a momentous few years.
Not only has it had to endure the transfer of sovereignty, no sooner did the flags change than Hong Kong - like the rest of Asia - was hit by the financial crisis.
It is a considerable tribute to the strength and resilience of people in Hong Kong that they have taken these tumultuous events in their stride.
It does not surprise me entirely, they are many of them former refugees or the sons and daughters of refugees and they are used to handling and overcoming adversity.
I am delighted that the Hong Kong economy is now bouncing back very strongly after a difficult couple of years.
Part of the reason for that is thanks to the excellent stewardship by Hong Kong's superb civil service, not least its chief secretary and financial secretary who served Tung Chee Hwa with the same skill and dedication with which they served me.
Hong Kong has an outstanding civil service and it would have been nice if that had been the thrust of the Xinhwa report which the honourable gentleman referred to.
For the most part, things have gone well but naturally there have been areas which have given rise to concern on the part of Hong Kong's many friends.
Both reports address these directly.
In particular, both reports mention the judgments in the right of abode case earlier this year.
That was an important matter.
We have emphasised and will continue to stress that the way in which this matter was handled, in particular the involvement of Beijing should remain wholly exceptional.
There have been other issues too, including the recent controversy involving academic freedom and the even more recent one involving the Public Order Ordinance, where the provisional legislature replaced the more liberal arrangement that my administration bequeathed with something rather less liberal.
I make no comment on that but I find it reassuring that Hong Kong public opinion continues to make clear that it takes its freedoms and rights very seriously.
That goes for the media as well, as I mentioned earlier.
The long-term success of one country, two systems was always going to depend on the willingness of Hong Kong people to stand up for their rights and liberties; so far they have shown every sign of being determined to do so.
There are one or two specific issues in our bilateral relationship to which both reports refer.
One is visa-free access to the European Union for Hong Kong SAR passport holders and the same issues apply equally for Macao.
Both the Commission and the honourable gentleman's report support visa-free access.
It was an issue that came up several times in my visit last week.
I made clear then - as I make clear today - that I strongly support visa-free access.
There are concerns on the part of some Member States.
These concerns are profoundly misplaced.
They stem from worries about illegal immigration from mainland China, not from the special administrative regions of Hong Kong or Macao.
We remain wholly satisfied with the integrity of the border controls in place and with the integrity of SAR passport issuing procedures.
The Council's visa working group which inspected the system was, I believe, impressed.
I hope that we will be willing to grant visa-free access.
I hope too that we will be able to reinforce a flourishing economic relationship with Hong Kong, with strengthened cooperation in other areas, such as education and the environment.
We will aim to promote the use of the European Communities' existing instruments in Hong Kong, such as participation in the Fifth Framework Programme on research, as the honourable gentleman's report recommends.
There are a number of further recommendations in the report which my officials will be studying closely.
If I can just say one word about intellectual piracy, to which the honourable gentleman, Mr De Clercq, referred; it has been a problem for years.
My administration took much more vigorous measures to deal with it.
The present administration is taking particularly vigorous measures to deal with it, under the new director of the customs service whom I happen to know rather well because he was my private secretary for a number of years.
Everybody has been impressed by the leadership that he has shown in tackling what is undoubtedly a serious problem for industry.
In closing, we strongly endorse the view in the Parliament that this monitoring - your monitoring and our monitoring - is valuable and that it should continue.
We do not seek to interfere in Hong Kong's affairs, but the international community and the European Union in particular have a considerable stake in Hong Kong and its continuing rights and freedoms are embodied in a treaty lodged at the United Nations.
We will continue to maintain our interest in Hong Kong.
It is a community which inspired admiration the world over for its achievements and which, much to the satisfaction of its last governor, continues to do so.
Thank you very much, Commissioner Patten.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 10 a.m.
Cooperation with ACP countries involved in armed conflicts
The next item is the report (A5-0296/2000) by Mr Van Hecke, on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy, on the Commission' s Communication to the Council and the European Parliament: Cooperation with ACP countries involved in armed conflicts [COM(1999) 240 - C5-0115/1999 - 1999/2118(COS)].
Mr President, the Commission communication which we are discussing was published one and a half years ago following the outbreak of war in Central Africa.
In the absence of a consensus, the Council has put the communication on ice all that time.
In that time, an estimated 1.2 million people have been killed in the Congo war.
In my report, I made a modest attempt to formulate a number of proposals in order to help end the spiral of violence and underdevelopment in which many of our ACP partners have ended up.
These proposals also aim to avoid European funds being used to finance the war machine.
My report can be summarised in three Cs: conditionality, coherence and control.
More so than has been the case so far, there should be a clear link between debt relief and financial assistance on the one hand, and good governance, respect for human rights, democracy and the rule of law on the other.
I would even argue in favour of fixing a ceiling for military expenditure in the ACP countries above which assistance or debt relief is no longer provided.
If these conditions are not met, the European Union needs to be prepared to take appropriate measures, ranging from diplomatic pressure and suspending aid, through to sanctions with a preference for arms and diamond embargoes or so-called 'smart' sanctions, which target the ruling elite rather than the population.
In this connection, I would also urge the Commission to apply unambiguous criteria for suspending aid.
I believe it would be particularly useful, in the framework of Article 96 of the Cotonou Convention, to compile a list of all possible infringements of this Convention.
At present, I cannot shake off the impression that the Commission is applying an ad hoc approach too often, which can make it vulnerable to the accusation of applying double standards.
In addition to conditionality, the emphasis is on more coherence, i.e. more coherence between the Lomé track and the CFSP track and between the policies of the Union and of the Member States.
Situations such as those in Ethiopia, where the European Commission and a number of Member States froze aid, while other Member States started up new programmes, must be avoided at all costs.
Moreover, stricter control on Community spending is required as a matter of urgency.
ACP states involved in armed conflict should allow the World Bank and the IMF full access to their accounts.
Misuse of European development aid for the purchase of weapons should immediately lead to the suspension of structural aid.
In that respect, Europe cannot be strict enough.
All of this should not detract from one of the European Union' s key roles, namely conflict prevention.
As Rwanda and Ethiopia have shown, the alarm signals are usually in place, but the reaction to these is often inadequate and late.
This is why it is important to tackle the cause of the problems in good time.
Conflict prevention also involves the fight against poverty, the reinforcement of democracy and civil society, better control of the illegal arms trade, the setting up of an African peace-keeping force, as well as an international regulation on the use of mercenary armies and better control of the worldwide ban on child soldiers.
In my report, I also call for greater involvement of the European Parliament.
It seems essential to me that we have more of a say in the freezing or unfreezing of aid.
I hope that the Council will not once again shelve this important communication, inspired by former Commissioner Deus Pinheiro.
If we are serious about contributing to a peace deal in Central Africa, we must take firm and coherent action, aid must be made subject to conditions and a general arms embargo will need to apply in the Great Lakes region.
Development aid should under no circumstance be used to fund wars.
That is unacceptable, both to the people affected and to the European taxpayer.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation, I would like to add a few considerations to the valid points already made by rapporteur Van Hecke.
I, and the rest of my Committee in fact, can concur with him in every respect, and I also want to thank him for the constructive cooperation which resulted in all amendments tabled by my Committee being incorporated in the text.
This will please the President as he will not have to sit through many votes.
The considerations which I would like to bring to you today for consideration, Commissioner, are mainly of a practical nature.
As recently as today, we read in our newspapers that the situation in the Ivory Coast has taken a turn for the worse once again, and that our own people who are there to report on the elections are running the risk of being involved in a new armed internal conflict.
We question the coherence of the policy of the Commission and the Council, whose absence in this Chamber I once again regret.
Although in September 1998, it was agreed not to provide any budgetary aid to countries at war, in March 2000 the Commission provided Rwanda with EUR 110 million, while this country is occupying considerable parts of the Democratic Republic of Congo, in defiance of the peace agreements.
I know that many who are involved in this conflict are themselves open to criticism.
But do we then not apply stricter rules to Kabila' s DRC than to Uganda?
Are we not stricter with Zimbabwe than with Rwanda?
I have the impression that that is clearly the case because, in practice, countries which are even involved in one and the same armed conflict are being treated differently.
Some are supported almost unconditionally by the European Union, the IMF and others.
Other countries are given aid under strict conditions.
This sometimes directly affects the power relations between countries involved in one and the same conflict.
Let me make myself abundantly clear: I am against any form of budgetary aid given to warring countries, for this aid is invariably used to buy weapons, directly or indirectly.
This is another weak area in our European policy.
Arms exports deserve a mention as they are without a doubt implicated in the various conflicts.
Not only is the illegal arms trade flourishing, but the controlled arms trade is also more interested in "fair competition" among arms traders than in the peace we are promoting.
Mr President, the new cooperation Agreement signed in Cotonou represents an ideal opportunity to correct the deficiencies noted in previous measures and to clarify concepts and standards for action in specific situations in which we cooperate with the ACP Countries, for example, in the situation that gave rise to the Commission Communication which concerns us here and to the reports by Mr Van Hecke and Mrs Maes, that is, what should happen when an associate country is involved in armed conflict.
Along the lines of what was said by the rapporteurs, we think the European Union will have to revise its programmes of aid to countries at war, amongst other reasons to prevent the funds allocated from being diverted to military activities.
Also as a matter of principle, it should reconsider support to countries or regimes responsible for armed invasions of neighbouring countries or that spend a disproportionate amount of their resources on arms, if not on operations to repress the rights of the individual or minorities within their own population.
We must bear in mind Article 11 of the new Treaty which states the European commitment to policies of building peace and preventing and resolving armed conflict.
The dialogue between the opposing parties and the dialogue of the European Union with these same parties must be the key mechanism of these actions.
Like Mrs Maes, we are perplexed at the paradoxical behaviour, in which we see how, since the creation of the European Union, millions of euros of aid have been approved for countries that are clearly involved in the military occupation of one or other of their neighbours.
In this respect, the double standards with which aid policy is sometimes applied are unacceptable, and we are also concerned by the contradictions that can arise in the conduct of Member States, or some States, and the European Union itself.
I think Parliament would benefit from greater transparency, coherence, information and control over these policies.
Finally, we must understand that the reduction or freezing of our development aid for a specific country at war would often need to be accompanied by additional efforts in humanitarian aid to the people of the country, who are the main victims of such conflicts.
Here again, the intervention of trustworthy NGOs is essential, enabling such programmes to be carried out with guarantees of success and effectiveness.
Mr President, violent conflicts are always man-made, however bestial in nature; they are never unavoidable like natural disasters; the leaders who cause them bear immense responsibility.
That is always the case, but especially so in extremely poor countries, where the population suffers twice as much; development grinds to a halt and years of external effort and aid are nullified.
And what is it about: gaining or refusing to relinquish power?
Accumulating minerals, massacring other ethnic groups, establishing independence or occupying part of the desert?
Africa, in particular, is an unusually belligerent part of the world.
One in five Africans live in a country which is embroiled in serious conflict and, to make matters worse, the conflicts are increasing, both in number and in intensity.
The big question is: why is this?
It is the European Union' s political and moral duty to do everything in its power to prevent or stop conflicts in ACP countries.
The report by Mr Van Hecke is very close to my heart.
We need to be much stricter vis-à-vis irresponsible ACP regimes; criteria for suspending aid must be clear, and sanctions need to be tailored to each country individually.
We must target the rulers and not the population, however difficult this is, and our Parliament must be directly involved in the decision to suspend aid.
It would be a complete outrage if European development aid were used to fund arms deals.
EU Member States which provide weapons to warring parties are partly to blame for the profound human suffering and the obliteration of their own development aid.
The Cotonou Convention is right in laying the foundation for further development, participation in world trade and political dialogue, but ACP countries which slip into violence destroy this cooperation and tear the Treaty to shreds.
Mr President, I warmly welcome this report and congratulate the rapporteur on it.
There is only one area of serious concern, and that is where the rapporteur extends the principle of conditionality to the area of debt relief.
In almost every other area I would support conditionality.
I strongly believe that we have a responsibility to use the tools available to us to promote good governance, democracy and the rule of law in our international relations.
But while these should indeed guide our aid policies, there is an important distinction to be made when it comes to debt relief.
That is because history demonstrates that responsibility for the debt lies with the lenders as well as the borrowers. Moreover, since the original loans were made the debt stock has continued to grow way beyond the original loans.
Many countries are repaying their debts several times over.
Some countries still spend more on debt repayment than on health and education combined, and yet the people suffering from this diversion of resources are certainly not those who had any benefit from the original loans that were given.
There is a valid argument that says, what is the point of cancelling debt if undemocratic governments simply misuse the funds for their own ends?
That remains a possibility.
But there is perhaps a stronger possibility that once populations know that debt has been cancelled, they can exert more pressure themselves on their governments to achieve much needed social spending.
Mr Van Hecke's report says that applying conditionality requires consistency and courage.
I agree.
But in the context of debt relief it also requires justice and a recognition that in many cases, the original debt has already been repaid many times over.
Mr President, the Van Hecke report raises a fundamental question: to what extent is international aid to countries involved in conflicts a factor in these conflicts and to what extent does this aid favour corrupt and belligerent governments?
In connection with one of the poorest and most unfortunate areas in the world, I should like to give two examples of the pernicious role played by unconditional international aid.
I am referring to one country which has been constantly at war since the 1960s and to another now enjoying a shaky peace, which, perversely, may be threatened by international aid: they are Angola and Mozambique, respectively.
In Angola, the government and UNITA are waging one of the cruellest civil wars in Africa, and unfortunately it is clear that international aid to the Luanda government in particular has played a part in perpetuating this conflict.
Unfortunately, I am afraid that my own government, the Portuguese Government, is involved in this military effort.
In the case of Mozambique, where there is a shaky peace that was only achieved with great difficulty, the ruling party' s use of international aid to favour certain provinces to the detriment of others according to their election results may in itself be a major factor in destroying the peace that was achieved through such efforts a number of years ago, thus reopening the civil conflict in Mozambique.
This is an issue that should be of fundamental concern to the European Union and the donor countries: whether in certain countries like Mozambique international aid is being used as an instrument of power to legitimise a government at the edges of democracy, and is thus helping to destroy a very shaky peace.
These are issues raised by the report that warrant considerable reflection on our part.
Mr President, I also welcome both the Commission communication and the report we have here today.
One key message in all this is the need for consistency.
The European Union has a number of activities under its umbrella: trade, Lomé agreements, CFSP, external policies and far too often one part is not necessarily consistent with another.
Consistency must be our primary objective.
Secondly, conflict prevention must be a priority of the European Union.
We are now getting the measures in place.
We have the High Representative, we have the planning and early warning unit in the Council.
They must now emphasise that it is conflict prevention we need to focus on rather than intervening militarily after a conflict has got out of control.
In particular, we must give due emphasis to things such as scarcity of water resources as a cause of conflict.
Commission policy should be aimed at ensuring that we enhance water supplies, not diminish them as has sometimes been the case.
As has been mentioned before, we need to stress the importance of good governance and democracy.
That should be a part of conditionality and we should demand of Member States that they do not support politicians for short-term requirements if they do not meet the essential requirements of good governance and democracy.
Far too often, we are prepared to support one against another group to the long-term detriment of peace in a particular region.
Finally, what we must do of course, is to stem the flow of arms into these regions, not just by actions against small arms.
I would like to see, as I outlined in my report last month, action taken against arms brokers throughout the European Union.
In many countries, there are no controls over the activities of arms brokers.
They are able to trade as they will, and in almost every conflict you will find arms brokers behind the proliferation of arms.
It is crucial as part of the EU code of conduct that we license arms brokers and start to control their activities.
It is no good governments tidying up exports if we allow private individuals to act in they way they are doing.
Similarly, we should also look at licensed manufacturing.
It is no good having rules on manufacturing within the EU if EU companies are able to license production outside as a way of getting round the controls.
I welcome this report, but would stress that we will not get anywhere unless we are prepared to stem the flow of arms into regions of conflict.
That requires much tougher action than we have been prepared to indulge in up to now.
Mr President, the report highlights what is self-evident, that is, that armed conflicts in Africa have seen a dramatic increase in number and intensity, and that they result in immense human suffering.
However, this compassionate language is also a way of covering up the direct or indirect but nonetheless overwhelming responsibility of the major European powers themselves in the majority of these conflicts, from Rwanda to Sierra Leone.
Today, in the Ivory Coast, even though, faced with the reaction of the population of Abidjan against the recently attempted coup d' état, both Lionel Jospin and Jacques Chirac have taken a stand against the putsch, how is it possible not to condemn the policy of French imperialism?
The links between General Gueï and the French administration are notorious, as are his links with a certain number of major French industrial conglomerates which control entire economic sectors in the Ivory Coast.
Paris noted the first coup d' état by General Gueï with a benevolent neutrality.
What is more, it exhibited shameful discretion towards the despicable ethnic, xenophobic demagogery which has been developed over a number of years by the rulers of the Ivory Coast.
The French authorities also remained silent on the fact that ethnicity was used in the selection of candidates for the presidential elections, which ran the catastrophic risk of transforming rivalries for power into all-out ethnic war.
If the European institutions really want to tackle the causes of the evil that is striking Africa, they must start by opposing the policy of the major European powers themselves.
Mr President, the rapporteur should be congratulated on the excellent work that was done so intelligently.
A good proposal such as this is actually crying out for implementation in practice, and we should commit our policies to it wholeheartedly for our own sake.
The report states quite rightly our own importance as the largest donor of aid to many ACP countries, a fact which is not yet sufficiently reflected at political level in the resolution of conflicts.
This must be the starting point for any action we take.
For that reason, I welcome the fact that the report speaks about the importance of positive conditionality with a high level of self-confidence.
There are good grounds for that.
The profile that crises have assumed in the last few decades has decidedly changed.
The UN, which was originally established to respond to conflicts between states, is seeking once again to get a grip on managing the increasingly common crises taking place internally in countries.
For this reason the EU, as an economic and political partner, now has an enormous responsibility and, furthermore, plenty of scope for influencing situations.
The trend worldwide would appear to be that more and more conflicts have a religious dimension: Kosovo, Chechnya, southern Sudan, Northern Ireland, East Timor, Sri Lanka, Nigeria, Kashmir and, one of the worst in recent times, the Moluccas, in Indonesia.
In the West this is not completely understood.
We are easily led to believe that when religion plays a part we are dealing with a private matter.
But in these countries religious tensions have been used for political purposes.
Mr President, we need the right tools to solve this delicate problem.
One important aim would be, in my opinion, to create the post of human rights observer, or representative, who would report to the EU, particularly on the issue of religious tensions.
The EU would also have to put pressure on governments, determinedly and systematically, to allow international human rights observers access to countries at war to conduct an impartial, neutral study of conflicts.
We must also use all the means available to us to demand that governments should always commit to ensuring the safe passage of those taking humanitarian aid to various regions.
The Commission initiative to review cooperation with ACP countries involved in armed conflicts in 1998 and its communication of May 1999, served to initiate a debate on the most appropriate response of the EU towards countries in conflict with which the EU has a close cooperation relationship.
My colleague, Mr Patten, proposed in March this year that the General Affairs Council should consider this communication in the context of its debate on conflicts in Africa.
The General Affairs Council concluded in May that the relevant bodies of the Council should continue their reflection upon the issue of development aid to countries involved in armed conflicts, on the basis of the Commission communication.
I regret that the Member States have not taken up the Commission's communication more actively.
Events in the Democratic Republic of Congo and its neighbours in Angola and Burundi, the Horn of Africa and now, again, in West Africa, particularly in Sierra Leone, have shown that we cannot escape facing these difficult questions.
The Commission is considering its response and in particular the use of Article 96 of the Cotonou agreement wherever this is appropriate.
A comprehensive framework would help us to respond on a case-by-case basis to each conflict.
If the Council is willing to follow up the communication, for instance by formulating Council conclusions, the Commission will assist in ensuring they reflect the many advances since mid-1999 in the EU's policy on crisis management and in the CFSP, as well as developments in the international community's response to conflicts.
We will also take account of the innovations of the Cotonou agreement, particularly regarding political dialogue, which should help us to find appropriate measures and proportionate and coherent responses.
But it is clear that there are no easy solutions to these problems, as the contributions in the debate here this afternoon clearly demonstrate.
The bottom line will, in any case, be defined by the real political will of Member States to stick to a common line.
The Commission cannot promise Parliament miracles in this field.
We are prepared to broaden deliberations to other countries involved in armed conflicts.
Violent conflict is not a phenomenon limited to ACP countries.
The European Union must be prepared to react to violence in an efficient and coherent manner in other regions of the globe too.
The communication is an invitation to engage in a debate about EU relations with countries for which the traditional form of development cooperation has become questionable or obsolete.
This is a difficult debate.
We would prefer to devote all our efforts to assisting the ACP countries in the difficult task of overcoming poverty and of integrating into a rapidly changing global economy.
However, for a considerable number of our ACP partners, the major challenge is the restoration of peace, or the containment of regional destabilisation.
Peace is an indispensable precondition to development, and countries that remain entangled in violent conflict exclude themselves from the potential benefits of the new cooperation relationship the EU is offering them.
They are also depriving themselves of the opportunities of the ongoing transformation of the global economy.
They contaminate the prospect of foreign investment, not only in these countries, but also in their regions.
In less unstable countries, our efforts to fight poverty and provide debt relief are contributing to conflict prevention in the longer term.
The Commission has not been idle since submitting the communication.
It has already taken numerous initiatives aimed at strengthening its capacities for effectively addressing the problem of violent conflicts in ACP countries.
Support is given to the OAU and sub-regional organisations such as ECOWAS and IGADD in the areas of conflict prevention and management.
It is remarkable how much funding is committed for the management of crises or for post-conflict reconstruction.
We are committed to stepping up our efforts for effectively preventing violence and for resolving crises peacefully.
The Community has a great number of instruments available for conflict prevention and resolution, ranging from trade and cooperation agreements to support for institutional capacity building, for strengthening respect for human and minority rights or for demobilisation and rehabilitation.
We are committed to making even more effective and targeted use of these instruments.
In this context we are aiming in particular to introduce conflict prevention objectives into the programming of economic and development assistance programmes.
The problem is, however, that the rigid character of these instruments is in itself a limitation to what we can do and how we can use them.
Budget line limitations and comitology-based decision-making procedures limit our options for flexible and quick reaction.
All this looks very different from the toolbox concept, which is what I think of when we talk about the numerous instruments that are available.
The toolbox concept provides a good image of the ideal situation and a satisfactory way of making use of the diversity of instruments.
However, we find ourselves in a different situation even though we are making determined reform efforts.
I would add that the basic value of development cooperation in relation to the issue of conflicts is the preventive effect.
Our hands are not so strong once conflict has actually broken out; we can make more meaningful efforts beforehand.
There is no doubt whatsoever that the HIPC initiative, funded by the EU but not yet funded by the US, is making the biggest contribution to conflict prevention in the world right now.
There is little doubt that the very poor, highly indebted countries will plunge into instability and conflict if the rich world does not deliver on HIPC.
Also the creation of regional economic cooperation, as provided for in the Cotonou Agreement makes a basic contribution to stability in Africa.
In the next few years we will give top priority to the creation of regional stability and cooperation structures as a major contribution to the promotion of peace and progress in Africa.
I should say a few words on the situation in the Ivory Coast, in view of what has been said in this debate.
Unfortunately there has been a rapid deterioration in the situation since the elections on Sunday.
It is changing almost from hour to hour, but we are of course following events very closely.
We anticipate that we will have to reopen the Article 96 consultations if a situation of stability and clarity is not established following the election.
This is really a situation that is highly regrettable and we fear there will be even more violence if things are not brought under control quite rapidly.
Thank you very much, Commissioner Nielson.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 10 a.m.
Moratorium on death penalty
This Parliament and, for what it is worth, this Commissioner, have been long-standing opponents of the death penalty.
Speaking for myself, I voted consistently against it when I was a member of another parliament.
One of the first decisions that I took when I was Governor of Hong Kong, with the support of organisations like Amnesty and Human Rights Watch, was to take the death penalty off the statute book of Hong Kong and I am delighted that it remains off the statute book.
Parliament has declared in the past that it considers capital punishment an inhuman, medieval form of punishment and unworthy of modern societies.
I know that many people would echo that sentiment.
I am pleased that all Central and Eastern European countries which are candidates for membership of the Union have abolished the death penalty.
We are moving towards a Europe in which the death penalty is outlawed continent-wide.
The European Union is opposed to the death penalty in all circumstances and has agreed to campaign for its universal abolition.
That stance is rooted in our belief in the inherent dignity of all human beings and in the inviolability of the human person.
In my case, my opposition to the death penalty is also rooted in my belief in the sanctity of human life.
Some 87 states retain the death penalty and about 30 carry out executions in any given year.
One or two states carry out executions in industrial quantities.
The European Union has been for some time now actively seeking a global moratorium.
The Union has defined a set of guidelines for identifying circumstances in which the European Union can take specific, targeted action.
These guidelines specify that the European Union will encourage states to accede to the second optional protocol of the Convention on Civil and Political Rights and comparable regional mechanisms aimed at the abolition of the death penalty.
We will also raise the issue of the death penalty in multilateral forums.
The European Union shares the deep concern of all those opposed to the death penalty, that it is impossible to reduce to zero the risk of applying the penalty in error.
That risk, the risk of taking innocent life, is reason enough in the view of many of us to outlaw it as a punishment.
Nor do we accept the argument that the death penalty is a deterrent to violent crime since in our countries the evidence simply does not support that claim.
In countries which maintain the death penalty, the European Union aims at the progressive restriction of its scope and respect for the strict conditions set out in several international human rights instruments under which capital punishment may be used, as well as at the establishment of a moratorium on executions, so as to eliminate completely the death penalty.
During the presidencies of Finland and Portugal, the European Union raised the issue of the death penalty with a host of countries including the authorities in Antigua and Barbuda, Burundi, the Bahamas, China, Guyana, India, Iran, Kyrgyzstan, the Palestinian Authority, Pakistan, the Philippines, Tajikistan, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, the United Arab Emirates, the United States, Uzbekistan, the Yemen and Zimbabwe.
In the case of China, we used the forum of our dialogue on human rights to press the issue time and again.
I regret that China continues to make almost daily use of the death penalty.
The European Union is especially concerned about the imposition of the death penalty on young people below 18 years of age at the time of the commission of the crime.
The European approach to juvenile justice is consistent with internationally recognised juvenile justice standards as enshrined in the international human rights instruments.
I said at the outset that the European Union had decided to raise the issue of the death penalty in multilateral fora.
This has not always been simple.
The House will recall that following intensive negotiation, we decided at last year's UN General Assembly in November that no resolution was better than a fatally flawed text and that therefore the European Union should not pursue its initiative in the United Nations General Assembly.
This April's UN Commission on Human Rights resolution was, however, adopted with a clear majority, I am extremely pleased to say.
It would seem that while the hard-line retentionists are resigned to further Commission on Human Rights texts on this issue, they will continue to resist strongly any efforts to secure a General Assembly resolution.
This would lead to further divisive debate.
As a result the European Union has decided that it would not be either advisable or timely to table a resolution on the death penalty at UNGA 55.
In the meantime we continue to support campaigns designed to achieve a moratorium on the death penalty and executions, and eventually the abolition of capital punishment throughout the world.
We do so under the budget lines that fall under the chapter "European initiative for democracy and human rights".
In particular under budget line B7-704 we are pursuing a number of initiatives throughout the world designed to mobilise public opinion against the death penalty.
In 1999 a joint programme was established between the Commission and the Council of Europe to raise public awareness about various themes related to the abolition of the death penalty in Russia, Turkey, Albania and Ukraine.
The programme, worth over EUR 670 000 over two years, will provide information to parliamentarians, to legal experts and to the general public on the penal policy arguments against capital punishment.
Let me repeat, this is a subject we take seriously.
It is a subject which I personally take extremely seriously.
We speak on it as a Union with a degree of moral authority. We are making progress.
But it will take time and persistence as well as the continued advocacy of this Parliament if we are to attain one day our goal, which is to see the death penalty consigned to the history books as a form of punishment which has absolutely no place in the modern world.
Mr President, Commissioner, as you have said so well on many occasions, Parliament, and with it the Group of the European People's Party, has declared itself against the death penalty and in favour of a universal moratorium on capital punishment, the sole objective of which is to achieve the definitive abolition of the death penalty throughout the world.
It could not be otherwise, given that this practice, which is directly connected with respect for human life, runs contrary to the defence of human rights, the first of which, the basis and foundation for all the others, is the right to life, which is promoted by the European Union.
There comes a time, however, when words are not enough and a far more aggressive attitude must be adopted in defence of what, for the Christian Democrats, constitutes the very core of our philosophy and our political action: the transcendental value of the person and the right to life from the moment of conception until their natural death; two principles which are incompatible with the application of the death penalty.
Therefore, we are not only advocating its abolition, but also proposing the possibility of using budget lines intended for human rights to campaign in favour of a moratorium on the death penalty, and that non-governmental organisations, both international and local, and religious authorities may also participate in the implementation of these budget lines.
And we propose this, first of all, because human rights and the abolition of the death penalty constitute a whole and because this enables us to move from words to action, and because the participation of civil society is essential to creating a mindset and a collective awareness in favour of abolishing the death penalty.
It is clear that there is a tendency in favour of abolishing the death penalty.
We need only look at the statistics.
Nonetheless, it is still applied in 90 States and we cannot turn a blind eye to the 1,625 known executions carried out in 1998, 80% of which took place in just four countries, including, in third place, the United States of America with 68 executions.
Therefore, together with respect for human rights, the abolition of the death penalty must be a key element, Commissioner, in relations between the European Union and third countries.
This is particularly so in the case of the United States due to the contradiction inherent in championing freedom throughout the world and having the power of life or death over its citizens, be it in order to set an example or because a majority of citizens requests it.
Democracy cannot subject everything to the law of numbers as no action affecting the fundamental rights of the person, the first and foremost of which is the right to life, can be undertaken or justified in the name of the majority.
If the death penalty - as the community of San Egidio told us - dehumanises our world by giving primacy to reprisals and revenge, then placing all measures, both economic and political, within our reach in order to banish a practice that is contrary to the principles and values that constitute our raison d'être should be a priority objective for the European Union.
We are therefore pleased that the Commission has adopted this objective and that it is being treated with the degree of gravity that the Commissioner told us this fundamental issue deserves, so that we might be in harmony with the principles we are defending.
Mr President, once again Parliament has declared itself to be in favour of human dignity and against the death penalty.
But on this occasion it has done so following the approval by the Convention of the definitive text of the Charter on Fundamental Rights of the European Union.
This Charter actually devotes its first chapter to human dignity, stating that it is inviolable and will be respected and protected.
It also states that nobody can be condemned to the death penalty or executed.
Parliament has spoken in favour of the Charter being incorporated into the Treaties and these rights of European citizens being applied to citizens of third countries.
However, it is more relevant than ever for us to ask ourselves whether it is time to demand that the Commission and the Council incorporate the abolition of the death penalty as a clause respecting human rights into negotiations with all third countries, not only those waiting in line to become part of the European Union.
1999 was another bad year.
According to Amnesty International, almost 2000 people were executed and in 63 countries 4000 others were condemned to death.
China, Iraq, Saudi Arabia, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United States are some of the 31 countries in which executions took place.
Did you know that in this last country, in the United States, that great upholder of democratic fundamentals - as Concepció Ferrer was saying just now - 98 citizens were executed in 1999?
Did you know that in 18 North-American states it is possible to execute a sixteen-year-old?
Did you know that in that same country, since 1976, 34 mentally-retarded offenders have been executed?
I draw attention to the United States, not because I am anti-American, which I am not, but because we are talking about a democracy with which we are on good terms, which watches over the interests of peace and democracy in the world.
I would like us all to ask ourselves whether we can do more.
It is time we understood that humanitarian declarations alone are not enough.
I believe that if we do not turn this fight into a political commitment, with a capital P, as a fundamental part of European foreign policy - and that is why I am pleased that Commissioner Patten is here - we will be doing less than we could to prevent this barbarism.
Let us do all we can from within this House.
Let us remember the words of Albert Camus: "There will be no lasting peace either in the heart of individuals or in social customs until death is outlawed" .
And another thing, Mr Patten, you were saying in your speech that we cannot guarantee zero error in executions.
Every execution is an error.
I am agnostic, but I read the Bible and it says that nobody should touch Cain in spite of the fact that he killed his brother Abel.
Every execution is an error that democracy, the defence of human rights and human dignity cannot accept.
Mr President, I welcomed Commissioner Patten's speech, in particular his words about his own personal experience, and the absurdity of a punishment which is becoming increasingly less effective in the world as a deterrent in the minds of a growing number of citizens.
Europe has certainly made substantial progress in its undertaking, with the formalisation of the rejection of the death penalty and the affirmation of the right to life in the Charter of Fundamental Rights, the forceful stipulation that any country wishing to join the European enlargement process must abolish the death penalty, the increase in intervention measures in respect of relations with third countries under the human rights clause and, lastly, the Council's prioritisation of the moratorium on the use of the death penalty as a common foreign and security policy action.
When our international institutions, when the AJA Tribunal is faced with the sentence inflicted on the criminal Tadic - who is guilty of heinous crimes - and we compare these appalling crimes with any of the incidents in any countries, including democratic countries, as a result of which thousands of people are now waiting on death row, we may be able to appreciate the fact that what had been a purely European characteristic, that is the rejection of capital punishment, may - in political time, not historical time - spread until it becomes the clearly predominant political, institutional and humanitarian modus operandi throughout the world.
This is the inspiration behind the new Europe of the start of the third millennium.
This, Mr President, is why it is necessary for the Commission - and I would ask Commissioner Patten to give an incisive response - to make good use of these amendments to the European Union's budget that were tabled by our Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party in respect of the 2000 budget.
Indeed, there can be no institutional initiative in this field without close cooperation with non-governmental organisations.
I therefore propose, Commissioner, that you consider the possibility of Europe establishing a European Day of protest against the death penalty: this would make a substantial contribution to generating a universal consciousness from that cradle of civilisation which Europe is and wishes to remain.
Mr President, the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance firmly supports the resolution which will be adopted tomorrow on the moratorium on the use of the death penalty.
It was on 10 March 1992 that Mrs Adelaide Aglietta presented the first major report to the European Parliament calling for a moratorium on executions, to be decided upon by the UN.
8 years on, as our resolution also highlights, the situation is serious and gives cause for concern, but international interest in the moratorium is constantly on the rise.
We must take this as a fresh starting point, despite the recent lull in UN activity and, for this reason, we must make good use of the resources available under the budget.
Of course, a moratorium would not have been able to prevent the 4 000 arbitrary executions which have taken place in recent years in Iraq or the thousands of executions which have taken place in China, but in other countries, especially the United States, the only great democracy still to exercise the death penalty with stubborn pride, this long labouring to mobilise public opinion to call for a moratorium is having some, very slight, effect.
Mr Bush, in whose State 144 executions have been carried out, succeeded in removing the issue of the death penalty from the electoral campaign and discreetly and hypocritically postponed the executions in his State until after the elections.
Might this not be yet more proof of the cynical manipulation of people's lives - even though they are often guilty, of course - as a cynical political move?
This is why we must continue along this road with the same conviction and tenacity that Mrs Aglietta had when she founded the association 'Hands Off Cain'.
We may not get there immediately but we are confident that, with the available funds from the budget and the assistance of the Commission, we will succeed in achieving this objective.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, everyone has the right to life and freedom under the UN Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
All the Member States of the United Nations have committed themselves to respect that declaration.
The death penalty irrevocablyviolates the right to life and is inevitably cruel, inhumane and humiliating.
In the year 2000 alone, 70 people have been executed in the USA.
There is a long list of countries in which the death penalty is carried out or in which death sentences are imposed, such as China, Iran and Iraq.
Although no death penalties have been carried out in Turkey since 1984, over 69 people have been sentenced to death.
The Turkish Parliament has the final word on carrying out this sentence and has 49 cases to deal with.
This is unacceptable for a state which is seeking membership of the European Union.
Turkey must abolish the death penalty if it is to be accepted into the European Union.
Why have a death penalty?
Since the death penalty has existed, people have unsuccessfully tried to justify the need for it.
Nowadays, supporters of the death penalty chiefly use the argument that it acts as a deterrent.
They maintain that the number of serious offences rises when the death penalty is abolished.
There is not the least evidence of this anywhere in the world.
For example, how can you explain that the murder rate in the USA, where the death penalty still exists, is considerably higher than in countries where it has been abolished?
There is always the risk of an innocent person being executed - there have already been many cases in which innocent people have been sentenced to death.
In particular, the death penalty is applied relatively often to the disadvantaged and to minorities.
The underlying principle of the death penalty is revenge, which is inappropriate in a civilised state.
Whether it is Abu-Jamal in the USA, Öçalan in Turkey or even the execution of Abdul Achmin Sabiin Iraq - we should condemn all of this.
I regard the death sentence as a barbaric ...
(The President cut the speaker off)
Mr President, in the same way as the Treaty of Amsterdam and the European Charter of Fundamental Rights, Parliament has repeatedly declared itself to be opposed to the death penalty which sadly, as has been pointed out, still exists in many countries of the world: countries with antidemocratic traditions such as Communist China and extremely liberal countries such as the United States.
We are also aware of how difficult it is to succeed in eliminating this penalty which is so very unnatural and inhumane.
It is even difficult in America where, as Mrs Frassoni pointed out, those who represent the institutions, the policy-makers, do not dare to propose abolishing capital punishment for fear of losing support.
The reason is clear: with the rise in organised crime the death penalty is considered to be a deterrent, containing and checking the increase in crime and illegal activity.
However, we know that this is not at all the case; we know that the death penalty is an abhorrent practice, a form of State-legalised crime.
We know that, even though it is strict and uncompromising, the fight against crime must be pursued under the banner of the law and social rehabilitation, certainly not in the name of repression alone or, what is even worse, with the mentality of an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth.
This is precisely why we must promote a Europe-wide campaign for a moratorium on the death penalty, a large-scale human rights campaign which involves everybody, from those with political or institutional roles to the citizens themselves, especially the younger citizens, precisely in order to create genuine civil awareness of the matter and to put political pressure on the countries in which the death penalty is still part of the law.
I would also like to propose that the European States refuse to trade with those countries in which the death penalty is still practised, but I know that this is nothing but a utopian dream.
I refer, in particular, to China, which, as the Commissioner too mentioned, issues a death sentence every day of the week and in general shows very little respect for human rights but which, regrettably, is also a highly attractive trading partner for all the European countries and one they cannot do without.
I would like to end by saying that these campaigns against the death penalty would be much more efficient and much more widespread if we were to succeed, as an institution, in conveying to our citizens the idea that we are simultaneously working, with equal determination and efficiency to build a safe Europe where it will be possible to eradicate terrible criminal scourges, such as drug trafficking, the exploitation of human beings and child abuse, in the very near future.
Mr President, any Member who is neither very young nor in his or her first parliamentary term cannot enter this debate without, as Monica Frassoni has done, paying an emotional tribute to Mrs Adelaide Aglietta.
It is to her that we owe the start of this lengthy undertaking in 1992, the start of this interminable battle in which we are still engaged.
And it is precisely with a view to the past, when I look at the progress made since 1992, Commissioner, that I cannot share your positive reaction to the Union's withdrawal of its support from the resolution presented in November at the United Nations.
Commissioner, I am convinced that this was an opportunity missed and that, due to the issue of the inflexibility of the wording, which prevented a compromise being reached on the preamble - I repeat, on the preamble, nothing to do with the body of the text at all - we were actually in danger of losing sight of the crux of the matter and ended up dancing to the tune of a whole range of powerful countries, some well-disposed towards the project and others not so well-disposed, or of great markets whose noses were most certainly put out of joint by this initiative.
This is nothing new - Europe was divided as early as 1994 over the motion for a resolution presented by Italy - but for this very reason it is all the more serious, for the eight years of work put in not only by Parliament but by your staff, I am sure, Commissioner, and the Union as such, could have resulted in a victory last November.
There is no doubt that victory would have been possible.
I repeat, in my opinion, we missed a major opportunity.
Having said that, Commissioner, I feel that, precisely on this type of subject, working in conjunction with organisations which operate in society or with non-governmental organisations is a key factor, for these organisations usually have greater room for manoeuvre, and are able to be bolder and uphold positions which are, so to speak, less influenced by other considerations or interests, in themselves legitimate but all too often liable to lead governments and institutions to compromise and assume less forthright positions.
This is precisely why part of the resolution calls upon the Commission to be more explicit in its report and in providing transparent information on the use of the year 2000 budget lines relating to this matter and to democratisation in general.
It has, in fact, happened in the past and still happens that the very organisations which have put most work into this matter have, so to speak, been excluded from working with the Commission on a project, even though they have been doing so for many years because, it appears, there is no more funding and we do not know exactly where it has gone.
That is why, Commissioner, I feel that transparency and the provision of information would benefit a joint project which, I feel sure, is of interest to us all.
Mr President, we must thank the Commission and the President-in-Office of the Council for including this vital issue in the weekly priorities, in particular at a time - as Mrs Díez reminded us - when the European Council has just proclaimed the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union.
At the moment - as it has been said - the images of the American electoral campaign and the final debate between the two main candidates are fresh in our minds; a debate in which the candidate for the Democrats stated publicly that the only thing he had in common with his opponent was being in favour of the death penalty.
I think it is important for the European Union to head the campaign to abolish the death penalty, given that it is a campaign in favour of human dignity and the most basic of fundamental rights.
Commissioner, I believe - and you expressed this very well - that when developing the European Union' s external affairs policy we must consider, with regard to the third countries, that there is already a declaration annexed to the Treaty of Amsterdam which clearly reflects that to be eligible for membership of the European Union, candidate states must have abolished the death penalty.
But, I insist, in relations with third countries we must be extremely clear and firmly promote relations with those countries that share our views on this matter.
Commissioner - Mrs Ferrer expressed this very well a moment ago - sometimes we need to move on from beatitudes to balance sheets and we must therefore support the Commission's action with adequate programming, effective action and, in particular, visible, clear, transparent action by the European Union with the participation - as Mrs Bonino stated - of the non-governmental organisations, which have a lot to say and contribute from this point of view.
Mr President, I believe that the institutions must live up to the values of our civilisation and that our citizens must see themselves reflected in the ethical mirror that, as a result of our work, we should be for them.
Mr President, Commissioner, if every petition which we discussed and approved in this House were worth a life then I would be satisfied.
Regrettably, however, this has never been the case and it is not so now.
We must avoid turning our reasoning and indignant declarations into a wake because, while we are expressing our indignation, executions are still being carried out.
Therefore, what we want from Parliament, the Commission and the Council too is sound pragmatism: we must endeavour to understand how we can be effective, how we can tip the balance so that the death penalty ceases to disgrace the whole of humanity.
This is what the resolution is trying to say.
There are two points which we consider to be of basic practical concern.
Firstly, the abolition of the death penalty or a moratorium must continue to be an inalienable priority in our relations with third countries, not a condition for friendship but a condition for political, commercial and economic cooperation.
The second point - which you raised, Commissioner, and which, I am happy to say, was taken up by many of the Members - is that the Commission must exercise great care in allocating its financial resources in order to support campaigns which are able to alter the public perception of the death penalty.
As Mr Salafranca pointed out, there was a rather embarrassing moment in the debate for the US presidential elections when both the candidates for the Presidency of the United States declared that they were in favour of the death penalty.
We are the children of Cesare Beccaria: we do not want our heritage to be confined within the borders of Europe.
Therefore, we need actions in support of non-governmental organisations, in support of civil society, in support too of those who have proved that they have the enormous amount of courage necessary to invest in this area, as Mrs Bonino mentioned.
I will end, Commissioner by calling for the highest possible degree of pragmatism from the Commission;
I call upon the Council to give voice to our governments;
I call upon Parliament to be courageous enough never to fall silent on this matter.
Mr President, every day, people are executed and, every day, people are condemned to death.
It is incredible and horrific that this should still be happening in the year 2000.
As has also been said by other MEPs in this Chamber - most of whom have been Italian, though I do not believe that that is really significant, given the disgust we all feel - it is an unworthy punishment: a punishment unworthy of a civilised society, which always involves a risk of innocent people being convicted.
China tops the list when it comes to the death penalty, and I and other Members of this Chamber have often made a point of condemning China.
Today, I thought, however, of concentrating on the United States.
There is a presidential election in the United States in two weeks' time, and the next president may be George Bush, a person who has signed 145 people' s execution warrants.
There have been legal doubts concerning a number of the cases, and there have also been a number of cases concerning children.
In at least one of these cases, the child concerned was mentally handicapped.
It is abominable and shameful, and it seriously damages the United States' s reputation as a democracy.
With the presidential election in mind, it is incredibly important that we should express our disgust in this Chamber.
I wish vigorously to support the proposal of my fellow MEP, Mr Rutelli, for a European day of opposition to the death penalty during our Presidency.
Mr President, between noble intent and practical action falls a shadow; on the issue of the death penalty it is the shadow of geopolitics and economic interests.
Your stand today on capital punishment goes beyond noble intent.
You mentioned the year 2000 budget lines aimed at financing campaigns for the abolition of the death penalty.
So far so good.
But the shadow is still there.
Let me come to the point, Commissioner Patten. The EUR 700 000 invested by the Commission went mainly to Penal Reform International, a legal organisation which operates in the Caribbean islands, and to the University of Westminster, which provides a database and research for lawyers in study centres in the Philippines.
So I urge the Commission to focus and extend the use of the assistance funds to the two main nations where state murder is practised with no restraint and with great relish: the People's Republic of China and the United States of America.
Yes, we know the issue has been raised ritually and periodically with the governments of both countries, but we have to do much more.
For instance, as regards the United States, some of this money should be invested in sensibilisation campaigns in Europe, certainly not in order to boycott a sovereign state like Texas, but to re-route European tourism and European industrial investment to those 12 states that do not indulge in such a barbaric practice.
Mr President, I am personally opposed to the death penalty for a variety of reasons, and despite this, I would like to make two fundamental observations which are at odds with everything that has been said so far in this Chamber.
First of all, surely we should not be comparing apples and oranges.
There is a world of difference between the implementation of the death penalty in, for example, the United States on the one hand, and in countries such as China, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, North Korea - to name but a few of a long list - on the other.
In the first case, we are talking about the highest penalty for extremely dangerous criminals who, moreover, have been able to avail themselves of very many defence mechanisms in the democratic court procedures.
In the other cases, the death penalty is often a kind of random and horrifying tool of intimidation used by no means only against dangerous criminals under common law.
Anyone who lumps all of this together is clearly deluding himself.
Secondly, I have to say that it is easy to shed crocodile tears over the fate of dangerous criminals in democratic states.
It is somewhat more difficult to take pity on those left behind, for example old people who are tortured to death for their savings, badly paid money couriers who are shot dead by gangsters in a heartless act, or children who are raped and killed.
If I were convinced that in Europe, there is the will to look after the fate of victims and the safety of victims, I, along with you, would condemn the death penalty here today without any reservation.
I can only establish that in practice, certainly in my country, extremely dangerous criminals are systematically set free early and it is not unusual for them to commit horrific crimes again.
It is in those circumstances not surprising that many people say that the death penalty for some monsters who have offended again and again could have saved numerous innocent lives.
Mr President, Commissioner, this debate, which is a repeat of other, previous debates would, on the surface, appear superfluous and outdated.
A debate on the death penalty is a debate which harks back to the development of a civilised legal system, which is something Europe already has.
And yet it is topical and important in terms of world affairs.
It is important for the Parliament of Europe - of Western Europe - to treat it as such since two traditions have evolved in Europe over the millennium: one which derives from the Roman tradition which influenced the European legal culture, particularly that of Italy and Germany, and recently paved the way for the new rights to freedoms, and then the tradition of Common Law, which is a basic part of the British Bill of Rights.
Despite certain very tragic events which have taken place in Europe, despite the fact that there have been fascist and communist cultures that have trampled underfoot rights to freedoms and the rights of individuals, I feel it noteworthy that agreement has been reached time and time again in this Parliament in discussing the death penalty and firmly condemning it in any form whatsoever.
In my opinion, the Charter of Fundamental Rights which is under discussion, for which Nice will be a decisive moment, is based on this value, the value of the human person, the value of the right to freedom.
We Italians are of the tradition of Cesare Beccaria, as has already been said, but Beccaria was a man who belonged to Europe, who rejected mediaeval, obscurantist law in its entirety in favour of modern law, in favour of a legal system which does not make us wolves to our fellow men but, by means of peaceful civil coexistence, guarantees freedoms.
Capital punishment is always incompatible with peace in civil coexistence and we must find the courage to declare that accepting a moratorium - although that would be great step forward - is not enough to make a country genuinely democratic: to achieve true democracy it must abolish the death penalty.
And so it is true: a humanitarian undertaking is not sufficient. We need to shout it from the rooftops that the death penalty is against the law.
Mr President, in 1999, eighty-five percent of all executions took place in only five countries: China, Iran, Saudi Arabia, the Democratic Republic of Congo and the United States.
It is, of course, correct that the European Union does not permit the death penalty within its borders.
The death penalty is the cruellest, most inhumane and degrading penalty.
It violates the right to life, is irrevocable and can involve innocent people.
Furthermore, it has never been proven that it is a better deterrent against crime than any other kind of penalty.
It was stated a moment ago that in the United States, there might be a better legal procedure or that very serious crimes are sometimes committed there.
But that is exactly the point.
We, as government, cannot afford to stoop to the level of the criminals we punish.
That is precisely the civilisation which we have achieved here in Europe and that is the civilisation which we must hold on to. We therefore give our warm support to Commissioner Patten' s policy.
Mr President, it is high time we adopted a universal moratorium on the death penalty, this 'veritable administrative murder' , as Albert Camus called it.
This is what I was saying in this House back in October of last year, when mobilisation was urgently called for to prevent the black American journalist, Mumia Abu Jamal, being executed.
What is the position today? A total of 77 states still see the death penalty as the appropriate response to certain crimes.
In 1999, 1813 people were executed in 31 countries and there are at least 3 857 people condemned to death in 63 countries.
The life of Mumia, who is waiting for a possible review of his trial, is, more than ever, hanging by the thread of international solidarity.
So what approach is the European Union going to adopt to ensure that the death penalty disappears before the end of the century?
During phase 2 of his life on death row, Mumia Abu Jamal sent this courageous message: 'Phase 2 is the second phase of the fight.
We will win' .
Indeed, encouraging signs bear witness to the rising abolitionist trend at a global level.
Like the European Parliament, the United Nations is now participating in the inevitable debate that is taking place across all levels of society.
In the United States, opinion is still very much in favour of capital punishment, but its hold has been shaken.
A study by the University of Columbia brought to light an almost 60% rate of errors committed in twenty years in the executions that were carried out.
Innocent people are being killed and racism is evident in the application of the death penalty.
The residence of the governor of Texas and the Republican candidate for the White House is regularly the target of demonstrations by opponents of the death penalty.
The European Union must put its full weight behind achieving this moratorium and imposing it as an inviolable principle on all nations still practising this form of state-sanctioned murder which, as Victor Hugo declared, 'traumatises the human conscience' .
Nineteen years after the abolition of the death penalty in France, initiatives are currently being taken in favour of a national day for the institution of a universal moratorium on capital executions.
And I am in favour of this proposal being advanced at a European level.
On 10 December, hundreds of thousands of petitions will be handed in to the United Nations.
The Presidency of the European Union could also join this campaign, thereby giving inspiration and crucial backing to those who are fighting for abolition.
The mobilisation of Europe is critical.
Mr President, I will sum this up very briefly and I hope Parliament will not misunderstand what I want to say at the outset.
We do not want to get into competitive humanitarianism, but I feel as passionately about this subject as any Member in Parliament and I have spoken in debates about this subject as often as anyone in Parliament, indeed I suspect I have probably spoken in more debates than some people in Parliament.
I have spoken in debates at university when I was a student. I have spoken in debates at universities subsequently in my political career.
I have spoken on radio and television programmes. I have been booed for what I have said at public meetings on capital punishment.
I have spoken in Parliament about capital punishment. I have spoken in Parliament during highly charged debates on terrorism, on terrorist acts and capital punishment, against the use of capital punishment.
This is in my experience a completely unique debate.
I have never taken part in a debate on capital punishment where everyone was on the same side and that is a point worth reflecting on.
The honourable lady in an extremely good and moving speech referred to the Bible and referred to Cain and Abel.
The Bible has been more misused in these debates - and I am not suggesting the honourable lady was misusing it - than most other texts except perhaps for Confucius.
Usually we hear the Bible quoted in another way. We hear that verse about an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth.
That is usually the text which is quoted so it was admirable to hear the honourable lady going back even further to Genesis.
And you cannot get much earlier than that.
I just ask Parliament to reflect on the fact that this debate included speeches all of which were on the same side - a side with which I passionately agree.
That suggests to me that we need not only to think about public information campaigns in other countries, but occasionally to think about the need for continuing public information campaigns in the European Union as well because I am not sure that everybody outside these extraordinary halls, outside this Parliament, thinks exactly as we do.
And we must remember that it is one of the tasks of political leadership to carry public opinion with you and not just to assume that everybody agrees with us.
I thought Mr Rutelli's idea about a European day in our calendar when we make the case again and again against capital punishment was a sensible and effective idea which falls into the area that I have been touching on.
When I find myself disagreeing with the honourable lady, my initial reaction is that I must be wrong.
The disagreement we have about the UN General Assembly is solely a disagreement about tactics.
There is no question that we want to see as a medium-term objective, a successful resolution and the UN General Assembly against capital punishment.
There is no question about that at all.
It was our view last year that we could not succeed as we would have liked. That there was the real danger of a ending up with a resolution being accepted which would have made the point with which I thoroughly disagree, and I think the honourable lady thoroughly disagrees, that the human rights record in one country is no business of other countries.
We could have seen the misuse of treaty language to make that point.
We want to have a good clean text denouncing capital punishment and asserting the universal validity of human rights including the sanctity of life.
We want to continue to build on what has been achieved in the Commission on human rights in order to build up the majority that we would like to see in the United Nations itself.
There were several references to countries where capital punishment is carried out in prodigious, horrific quantities.
There were references to China and we know well the record there.
It is an issue that we raise again and again in our human rights dialogue.
I cannot say hand on heart, or even hand off heart, that it is getting us very far, but we continue to raise the issue.
It is also an issue that we raise with the United States.
We made a general démarche in the United States in February this year, in addition to the démarches we made to individual state authorities: for example, in relation to individual cases of the death penalty.
We called upon the United States to establish a moratorium on the use of the death penalty, with a view to completely eliminating capital punishment.
We urged the United States to withdraw its reservation to the article of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights concerning the prohibition on imposing the death penalty on minors.
We also called upon the United States to respect the strict conditions under which the death penalty may be used, which is set out in several international instruments.
One or two honourable Members referred to the presidential debates.
They referred to the fact that both the Republican and Democrat candidates, whatever they disagreed about - the size of government, the rate of taxes, moral standards in public life - the one thing they agreed on was capital punishment.
They may agree about capital punishment. They may say capital punishment is effective and morally justified because they believe that.
Most American politicians, public officials, seem to take that view and it is sometimes the case that public officials, elected officials, take particular points of view because they think they are popular.
It may be that, going back to the point about public information, we also have to address that issue in even perhaps the best informed society in the world.
The number of executions, the number of people in prison, the number of executions in the United States is extraordinarily high for a country whose democracy was celebrated in such appropriately eloquent terms by Alexis de Tocqueville a century ago.
I am not sure what he would have thought about the presidential debates.
I am not sure what he would have thought about the amount of capital punishment in the United States.
This has been a useful, if admirably atypical, debate.
I hope we have it again.
But I hope that we also go out and debate this issue in company which is not so uniform in its judgments and wisdom.
I hope we use our intellectual as well as financial resources to put the case again and again for the sanctity of human life, against the intolerable practice of capital punishment.
We must all look forward to the day when capital punishment is regarded as a medieval barbarity, as it should be.
I have received two motions for resolution pursuant to Rule 37(2) of the Rules of Procedure.
The debate is closed.
The vote will be taken on Thursday.
Mission by Commissioner Patten to Serbia
The next item is the Commission communication on the mission by Commissioner Patten to Serbia.
As one or two honourable Members may know, I had been due to attend, alongside Javier Solana and Bodo Hombach of the Stability Pact, the special summit of south-east European leaders in Skopje today, which has been organised by President Trajkovski to welcome Yugoslavia back into the family of south-east European nations.
But I told President Trajkovski that much as I would have liked to have attended, I needed to be here in this Parliament today, demonstrating democratic accountability in action.
I have had several debates and it has been a pleasure to take part in them.
But I am pleased to be able to report back to the House on my visit to Yugoslavia yesterday and on Monday.
Like many honourable Members, I had long hoped for the chance to report on such a visit and on our efforts to build ties with a democratic Belgrade.
Many of us have been surprised and inspired by the triumphant return of democracy to Serbia in recent weeks.
I guess we should not have been surprised that democracy always wins in the end.
The European Union made abundantly clear before the elections which took place just a month ago today that democratic change in Yugoslavia would mean a radical shift in the European Union's policy towards that country.
What a difference a month can make.
In the summer I reported to this House about a Serbia that was an outcast among European nations, about the repression of the brave, independent media, about our support for the opposition.
Today, although it is early days, the opposition are in government and the independent media suddenly find that they are no longer embattled and alone but in the vanguard of a new effort to create a truly open and pluralistic media for the whole country.
From the moment the people of Serbia made their democratic will clear and from the moment they insisted it should be respected, the European Union has been as good as its word.
Barely four days after the democratic transition on 5 October, European Union foreign ministers announced the lifting of sanctions and the immediate repeal of the oil embargo and the flight ban.
They announced the extension of the European Reconstruction Agency to Serbia and Montenegro.
They underlined our willingness to press ahead with clearing the Danube and to provide the resources to do so.
They asked the Commission to draw up proposals to extend our recently announced trade preferences for the Balkans to the whole of Yugoslavia.
They expressed a wish for Member States to re-establish or normalise diplomatic relations with Yugoslavia at the earliest opportunity.
They underlined the willingness of the European Union to contribute to the institutional and economic rebuilding of the FRY and they extended an invitation to President Kostunica to attend the informal European Council in Biarritz and to participate in the regional summit that the Presidency is organising and which is to be hosted by the Croatian Government in Zagreb on 24 November.
The day after the foreign ministers' meeting, Foreign Minister Védrine representing the presidency, flew to Belgrade to inform President Kostunica in person of the measures decided by the European Union to honour the promises it had made to the people of Serbia during the election campaign.
The same day, just five days after 5 October, a team of Commission officials arrived in Belgrade to discuss with President Kostunica's advisers an urgent, short-term assistance package.
Later that week, the European Commission proposed to the European Council at Biarritz that the budgetary authority, including this Parliament, should approve an emergency package of assistance to Serbia worth EUR 200 million, 180 million of it mobilised from the emergency reserve.
In the last few days, a team from our Reconstruction Agency has been in Belgrade, working out in close partnership with President Kostunica's team, and in particular with Professor Labus and the G17 group of economists, as well as with other donors, precisely what assistance we can deliver and how we can ensure it arrives on the ground in Serbia as rapidly as possible in the next few weeks, given the onset of winter and given the upcoming Serbian Republic elections on 23 December.
Following these initial missions I went myself to Belgrade on Monday and yesterday afternoon I visited Podgorica.
In Belgrade I met President Kostunica and held a separate meeting with him and some 80 mayors from democratic municipalities.
I visited the headquarters of the students' resistance movement, and met the brave independent journalist, Marislav Filipovic, jailed by Milosevic for telling the truth and recently freed under President Kostunica.
I met with Professor Labus and his colleagues of the G17 group of economists and with colleagues from the World Bank to discuss both short-term help and the longer but vital task of long-term reconstruction, especially institution building and building the rule of law.
I met the Mayor of Belgrade and visited with him a Belgrade school being renovated under the European Commission's Schools for Democracy programme.
I visited the Independent Media Centre, a kind of haven for independent journalists which the European Commission has helped to support; and gave an interview.
I also visited the studio of the independent television and radio station, B92, which was harassed by Milosevic and supported amongst others by the European Commission and whose journalists, like other independent journalists, will deserve prominent and flattering mention when the history of the last few weeks in Serbia comes to be written.
They were infinitely braver than I have ever had to be.
I also had important meetings with representatives of the democratic opposition of Serbia and with NGOs and representatives of civil society, including the impressive head of the Civic Democratic Alliance, Goran Svilanovic.
I briefed European Union heads of mission before my departure to Montenegro where I had meetings yesterday evening with President Djukanovic and Prime Minister Vujanovic.
Let me just say a word about my meeting with President Kostunica and the emergency assistance package that we are finalising for Serbia.
I set out for President Kostunica our determination to provide assistance to Serbia as rapidly as possible.
I was impressed by his commitment to democracy and made very much aware of the huge challenge he faces in consolidating democracy in Serbia, especially in the run-up to the Serbian elections.
I made clear to him our willingness to be as helpful as possible.
I applauded the approach he had taken at Biarritz and during his recent visit to Sarajevo, in particular his willingness to establish diplomatic relations with Bosnia and Herzegovina without delay.
Others will have seen the comments he made during a recent CBS interview.
It seems to me that President Kostunica has made an impressive start in formidably difficult circumstances that few of us predicted a few months ago.
He deserves a certain amount of political elbow-room, as he tackles those problems and consolidates his position, and all the practical support we can muster.
That is why we have moved fast to put together a large-scale emergency assistance programme for Serbia.
Our priorities which have been drawn up, following close consultation with democratic leaders in Belgrade, are to provide help, above all, with energy supplies as well as with medicines and possibly with food.
As part of the same package we will extend country-wide our highly successful Schools for Democracy programme which for some months now has been providing basic improvements to schools in municipalities which were run by the opposition.
Now we will do that Serbia-wide.
We are going to launch a new programme called Towns for Democracy to provide basic municipal improvements and services and we are going to reinforce our support for the media and civil society in this critical phase.
It is clear that Serbia faces a formidably difficult winter, especially on the energy front.
We are going to do everything we can to alleviate the problems but it will still be tough because Milosevic has left Serbia's new leaders with a spectacular shambles.
On energy we are looking urgently to extend our Energy for Democracy programme across Serbia.
In particular we are envisaging shipping in diesel and heating fuel, both to keep the power plants running and to fuel district heating plants.
We will operate mainly through the municipalities, as we did last year under our pioneering Energy for Democracy initiative.
I had an extremely useful meeting with President Kostunica and many of the mayors to discuss priorities.
I hope I have made it clear what a formidable task we face.
We will have to work with others and, despite our efforts, Serbia faces a difficult period.
But we are working flat out to get our help on the ground as rapidly as possible, which means from the second half of November.
The people of Serbia know that, from now on, they do not have to face the future alone but with the staunch support of the European Union and the entire family of European democracies at their side.
It was clear from my meetings with the mayors and others that expectations of the European Union are very high.
We must not disappoint them.
I hope there will be rapid agreement in the Commission and in the management committee on the programmes we have in mind so that deliveries can indeed start in the second half of November.
The people of Serbia will not understand if bureaucracy stands in their way and nor will I. We simply must get moving very fast indeed.
Let me make a further very important point: none of the assistance that I have described is at the expense of our efforts elsewhere in the region.
I and, I believe, ministers in the General Affairs Council are acutely aware of the European Union's obligations to Croatia, to Bosnia-Herzegovina, to Albania, to FYROM and to the people of Kosovo and to Montenegro.
We are not going to relax our efforts elsewhere in the region. If anything, we are going to redouble them.
That was one reason why I visited Podgorica yesterday, my third visit since March and the first time I was able to fly in with a visa from Belgrade.
I discussed our considerable assistance programme with President Djukanovic.
We have given EUR 55 million to Montenegro this year in recognition of the pressure that Montenegro was under from the Milosevic regime and the brave democratic path that it has taken in the last three years.
I informed the president and prime minister of our plans to extend the activities of the European Reconstruction Agency to Montenegro and I informed them, in the light of the welcome democratic change in Belgrade about our proposals to extend the full benefits of our recently implemented asymmetric trade measures for the region to Montenegro as well as to Serbia.
This will be a big boost to Montenegro's economy.
I listened to the views of the prime minister and the president on recent developments and on relations between Montenegro and Serbia.
I made clear to them and to the press that I had been impressed by President Kostunica's commitment to democracy and the formidable challenge he faced in consolidating it.
The European Union was determined to do all it could to help, which was why we were putting together a substantial emergency package for this winter.
Speaking as a friend of Montenegro, I said that when elected democratic leaders held out the hand of friendship it was very important to grasp it.
I underlined my view that with Milosevic gone, remaining problems should be resolved through a process of rational and calm dialogue displaying understanding of others' points of view, a certain generosity of spirit and a degree of patience.
(These are attributes that have not always been widely available in the region in the last decade - I understate the point.)
Now a new generation of leaders was in power who want to do things differently, I concluded.
Let me just finish today by saying that this year began with democratic change in Zagreb and this autumn we have seen much hoped-for democratic change take root in Belgrade.
There is still much to do.
Democracy, although I believe it to be irreversible, is still young and fragile in Serbia.
What we have now before us is the best prospect for a generation of building lasting peace and prosperity across the whole of south-east Europe - the chance truly to draw a line under the traumas of the recent past and to look to the future, a future in Europe.
The European Union is ready for that task and stands ready to do all in its power to deliver on the hopes of so many whose lives have been blighted by the horrors the Milosevic regime inflicted inside and outside the borders of Serbia.
It is an enormous challenge, but this is the challenge for which all of us have been working for so long.
Now we have a duty to rise to it.
Mr President, let me start by thanking the Commissioner for his swift visit to Belgrade and for reporting back to us so promptly.
Normally speaking, I believe that that is one of the tasks of the Commissioners and I would not comment on it under normal circumstances. But I would like to make an exception and say that I appreciate the fact that he is here today.
Last time we talked about Serbia, I urged MEPs to exercise some patience with Mr Kostunica because I had the impression that there had been progress almost every day, and I believe we can see evidence of this progress, up to and including yesterday when Mr Kostunica declared himself willing to assume responsibility, which I believe is crucial, for the Serbian crimes in Kosovo.
I specifically have three questions for the Commissioner.
Did he and Mr Kostunica discuss the position of the Kosovar refugees?
As you know, there are still approximately two thousand people in Serbian prisons without any charge.
Rumour has it that this situation will soon change.
I was interested to hear if he had any further information on this.
My second question relates to Kosovo.
I share his view on what he said here about Montenegro, but the biggest problem is, of course, what to do with Kosovo.
My final question is about the money.
I welcome the emergency aid.
Is the Commissioner convinced that the maximum sum of 250 million, which is earmarked for next year, will be enough to provide Serbia with structural aid?
Mr President, Commissioner, I am grateful for your comments, and support everything you have said.
I would have said it in a similar way, except that I express myself differently.
I had the same experience when I was in Serbia a fortnight ago with Mr Swoboda.
Although we were not there before Mr Hombach, we did go there, because we have the funds to help people there.
Mr Hombach only went there to make his presence felt and to establish what it might be possible to do.
We know what can be done and we are in a position to make the funding available tomorrow, which I am very pleased about.
I am also sure that under your auspices, Commissioner, emergency aid really will be provided swiftly.
This is an opportunity for the Commission to demonstrate that it does not deserve its reputation.
I have two questions.
First, Mr Modrow alleged yesterday evening that everything we are doing there amounts to reparation for the NATO bombing.
I told him that was nonsense. 90% of the damage that we are making good there is the result of socialist and communist mismanagement.
I would be grateful if you would confirm this point.
Secondly, when we were down there two weeks ago, we were told that the sanctions were being lifted, but they have not been lifted.
Where do things stand on trade sanctions?
Have you resolved that issue?
Companies need to be able to do business now.
You can put Milosevic's entourage on a blacklist, but you should open things up for everyone else!
Mr President, Commissioner, the dramatic apology of the Yugoslavian President, Mr Kostunica, also referred to by my fellow Member, his admission of guilt and the guilt of the Serbian people - something which many nations have never done - is a gesture which does him credit and which will make an important contribution to improving the climate in the region.
Politically, Mr Kostunica is associating himself with the decisions of the international community which considers that Kosovo is still part of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and, at the same time, is lowering the hopes of the Albanians of Kosovo of achieving a state of independence.
What kind of tension - a tension which naturally seems paradoxical to us, even with the return of some of the Serbian refugees - could be generated by this lack of self-determination so longed for by the Albanians?
In your opinion, Commissioner, on the basis of your conversations with him, to what extent is the moderate Mr Rugova likely to be willing to agree to enter into dialogue with his democratic counterpart in Belgrade?
This time last year I visited Belgrade, a rather bleak city, veering from despair to hope on a daily basis.
I went to see the NGOs working in humanitarian and free media fields, financed by the European Union, and the picture was not a particularly happy one.
The aspiration was there but the actuality was not.
The promise was there but the performance was not, because the money was not coming through and there was an administrative bungle.
I want to ask the Commissioner if he will confirm that he will thank the staff of the Commission both in Brussels, and in particular in the Belgrade office under Michael Graham, the head of the delegation, who throughout this time have gone through enormous change and have actually wrought a major difference in the process of moving towards democracy.
Despite the difficulties, they have achieved something rather remarkable.
I would like the Commissioner to confirm that he will thank not only those people but also the NGOs working in the field.
More particularly I hope he will accept the thanks of this House, because he has demonstrated that democratic activism not only works in Hong Kong but also in Serbia.
I would also like to thank the Commissioner for his efforts and I hope I can without being pretentious assure him that the relatively low attendance in this House does not, I am sure, reflect the level of interest in this subject.
I think, just as an aside, there is something weird about the procedures of this House that we spend an hour and a half voting at lunchtime but for such an important topic we do not enable people to be here in the numbers that would reflect the interest.
I wanted to ask him about regional cooperation.
Is he, and we as the European Union, making progress in convincing the players in the region that when we encourage them to have regional cooperation, this is not a diversion from a move towards Europe and to eventual membership of the European Union, assuming all the criteria will be met with no deadlines and timescales, but a step towards eventual EU membership?
Mr President, what I have to say relates to Kosovo because it was the Commission communication on Kosovo that you were supposed to talk about today, which somehow got transformed into a communication on Serbia.
I understand this, given that there is a new leader, President Kostunica, and that it is necessary to be involved in the process with him so that things can go ahead properly.
Last week, I was in Pristina.
I met a lot of people and, in particular, I met Bernard Kouchner for a working session.
I also saw the enormous problems that exist there.
You spoke about the Danube, but it is simply not enough to carry out studies.
Urgent action must be taken because the Danube is being polluted by stockpiles of sulphuric acid and from sources in Mitrovica.
There needs to be a risk control plan not only for this region, but also for the town of Pristina and for other towns in Kosovo.
Whole populations live in destitution.
Attacks with enriched uranium warheads have polluted the town of Pristina and the other areas that were hit.
The destruction of the sports stadium released asbestos into the air, which spread throughout the town.
There is a very serious health problem.
I would therefore like to draw your attention to this and to tell you that there is a social problem.
This aid must go on social concerns, the widows and orphans and so on.
Urgent measures need to be taken.
I must insist on this.
I am grateful to my honourable friend for what he said about Michael Graham and his staff in Belgrade.
They have done an excellent job.
I was delighted to be able to thank some of them, though on my next visit I hope to be able to thank all of them, and I will certainly refer to the honourable gentleman's handsome tribute. As far as the NGOs are concerned, they have done magnificently.
The organisations in the media field have done magnificently.
We were superbly well-served by the Swedish-Helsinki Committee, for example, but there has been excellent cooperation and despite all the difficulties put in our way by Milosevic's regime, we were able to get a considerable amount of help through to the democrats and the democratic forces in Serbia.
That I hope played a small part in bringing about change.
The honourable lady was entirely right to say that it is sometimes suspected that encouraging regional cooperation is a sort of Brussels stalling on the route towards Europe.
We have to explain to people that what we are trying to see happen in south-east Europe is what we know has worked for us.
The European Union is the best example in the world of countries dealing with ancient animosities, countries becoming both more politically stable and more prosperous by knocking down frontiers, by knocking down boundaries and in certain areas pooling their sovereignty and doing things together that they do better together.
That is what we are trying to encourage the countries of south-east Europe to do.
For example, we are saying to them, we will give you very generous trade access to our markets but you have to give generous trade access to your neighbours' markets as well.
That is at the heart of the stabilisation and association process which is gradually and successfully moving forward.
On the Danube and environmental and health problems, I agree with what the honourable gentleman has said.
President Kostunica said at the meeting with mayors, that in the new democratic era Yugoslavia was going to have to do quite a bit about gender mainstreaming because they were only I think three women in the room at that meeting.
But one of the women mayors present at the meeting raised specifically the question of the environmental and health hazards caused over last year and we will need to look at problems like that because they pose a serious health hazard to many people in south-east Europe.
Thank you, Commissioner.
The debate is closed.
Climate change - Floods
The next item is the joint debate on:
the report (A5-0270/2000) by Mr Moreira Da Silva, on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, on a communication from the Commission on EU policy and measures to reduce greenhouse gas emissions: towards a European climate change programme (ECCP) [COM(2000) 88 - C5-0192/2000 - 2000/2103(COS)];
the report (A5-0271/2000) by Mr Moreira Da Silva, on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, on the European Commission Green Paper on greenhouse gas emissions trading within the European Union [COM(2000) 87 - C5-0193/2000 - 2000/2104(COS)];
the oral question (B5-0547/2000) by Mrs Jackson to the Commission, on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, on the Commission strategy for the sixth Hague conference on climate change (COP6);
the statement by the Commission on the floods in northern Italy and Spain.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, eight years on from Rio de Janeiro and three years on from Kyoto it is no exaggeration to say that the dossier on climate change has now reached its most critical moment, its real moment of truth, for two basic reasons: first, because at an institutional level COP-6, which will take place in The Hague this November, is to draw up the Kyoto Protocol in its final form and initiate the Protocol ratification stage so that it can come into force by the 'Rio Plus Ten' Conference, i.e. by 2002.
Secondly it is a critical moment because, at a domestic level, we are moving further away instead of getting closer to the reduction targets agreed at Kyoto, because of the failure by Member States to implement policies and measures on, for instance, energy efficiency, the promotion of renewable energy sources and taxation on energy and greenhouse gases.
In this extraordinarily challenging context, we applaud the Commission' s initiative in bringing out together the Green Paper on emissions trading and the communication 'Towards a European climate change programme' .
Even though the substance of the proposals deserves a few comments and a few criticisms, as you will see, the truth is that this initiative has sent out two incontrovertible political signals.
To the outside world it has regenerated the European Union' s capacity for leadership. Within the Union it has taught us a lesson about meeting commitments.
Let us begin by examining the Green Paper on 'emissions trading' .
This Green Paper has opened the debate on the architecture of a future emissions trading system within the European Union.
To start the system off, the Commission has defined a hard core of premises: the system should be based on a 'learning by doing' approach, it should start in 2005, and during an initial stage it should be restricted to carbon dioxide and major point sources.
In my view, and this is reflected in the report, the establishment of a system of this kind within the European Union from 2005 has undeniable benefits.
Let me highlight three.
First, this system will allow industries, companies and Member States to gain practical experience and prepare themselves economically for the 2008 launch of the emissions trading system at an international level.
Secondly, this system will help provide an easier remedy to the situation that most Member States are in today of not meeting their targets.
Thirdly, the system will enable us to make huge reductions, in the order of billions of euros per year, in the costs of implementing the Community' s Kyoto commitments.
Despite the merits of this initiative and the technical quality of the Green Paper, on which we congratulate the Commission, the coverage of certain points is rather limited.
Thus the task of this report has been to extend the debate begun by the Green Paper in both breadth and depth.
That is our task.
Let me highlight six points from my considerations.
One: the Green Paper should have set quantified targets for greenhouse gas reduction to be attained by the emissions trading system; in other words, the Green Paper should have said what percentage of greenhouse gas reduction would be allocated to emissions trading.
Two: I believe the Green Paper should not have avoided carrying out an analysis into the possibility that the emissions trading system might give nuclear energy a competitive advantage.
Three: I believe it is essential that the system should in future embrace certain sectors that the Green Paper has ruled out for now, especially transport, which is the sector in which emissions are growing the fastest.
Four: in the debate on the scope of the system, the Commission should not have set direct emissions trading between companies as the only possible option.
There are other options, and I hope the Commission will soon consider all the alternatives.
Five: I believe it is crucial to involve the countries applying for membership of the European Union in the emissions trading system as soon as possible.
To this end I invite the Commission to present a plan in a forthcoming communication specifying how those countries can be brought into the emissions trading system.
Lastly, point six: I believe that, with regard to the method of allocating emissions licences, auctions could more easily ensure the desired environmental result, non-distortion of competition and the simplicity of the system than 'grandfathering' could.
But this is not the appropriate moment to exclude any method, and so I invite the Commission to continue its deliberations and to include a third option, too: benchmarking.
Let us now examine the communication on the European climate change programme.
In view of the commitment and quality of the Green Paper on emissions trading, the communication on policies and measures, the communication 'Towards a European climate change programme' is a disappointment.
It is a disappointment because it results in the role of policies and measures, in other words, the role of domestic and Community political action, being sidelined in favour of market mechanisms.
It is also a disappointment because this communication results in an unbalanced treatment of the various economic sectors; in particular it was hoped that those sectors that were not included in the emissions trading system might see the approval of an ambitious approach with well-defined commitments in the other communication, the one on policies and measures.
I therefore call on the Commission to conclude the European climate change programme, the ICCP, with some urgency and to submit, six months after COP-6, a set of specific proposals on policies and measures defining quantitative commitments on the reduction of greenhouse gases for each economic sector and for each policy and measure.
Let me very briefly say a few words about the forthcoming United Nations conference, COP-6, which will take place in The Hague this November.
The difficulty with COP-6 is not just a result of the complexity of the Kyoto leftovers but also of the political situation in the United States.
Note that, regardless of the result of the American elections, it will be Bill Clinton and Al Gore who will be negotiating the Kyoto Protocol in The Hague.
So we face some extremely worrying scenarios.
If Bush wins, all the agreements we make in The Hague with the Clinton administration may be totally ignored by the new administration.
If Al Gore wins, there is nothing to prevent it continuing to be very difficult to find the two-thirds majority in the Senate needed to ratify the Protocol.
I therefore think that the European Union should not give up its negotiating agenda.
The European Union has a good negotiating agenda and should not give it up.
If we give it up in the hope of reaching an agreement with the United States, we risk ending up with a lose-lose result: we will have weakened the text of the Protocol and, what is more, it may even fail to be ratified by the United States.
That is why we have to give signs of opening up towards Russia, Canada, Japan, Norway and the countries of Central and Eastern Europe.
I should like to close, Mr President, by thanking all the Members, particularly the draftsmen of opinions and shadow draftsmen, for having made it possible to reach a broad consensus on the strategy for halting climate change.
.
(NL) Mr President, the emission of greenhouse gases is still on the increase, although the European Union has committed itself to an eight percent reduction in the emission of these gases in the period 2008-2012.
We need to see the Green Paper on greenhouse gas emissions trading against this backdrop.
The Green Paper constitutes the first step towards establishing an instrument which is in conformity with the market, which prescribes a ceiling for emission levels and which, in time, will offer very efficient and effective opportunities to reduce these emission levels.
In this way, there is a chance that the European Union will still manage to fulfil its obligations with regard to the Kyoto Protocol.
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs endorses the thrust of the Green Paper.
It does, however, set great store by a solid basis for the trading system, which must be simple and transparent to the participants and underpinned by sound market institutions.
Otherwise, the system will expire through a lack of faith on the part of the market operators.
In addition, the system must be competitively neutral on behalf of the companies involved.
In this respect, we have serious objections to a few paragraphs in the present motion for a resolution, for these aim to distort competition through an inconsistent adoption of the sector-by-sector approach.
The result of the rapporteur' s approach is that companies from the same sector in the various Member States may be treated unequally.
After all, a lorry driver will not compete with a chemical company but rather with lorry drivers from other Member States.
I hope that this misunderstanding can be put right with a number of amendments.
I am interested to see if Commissioner Wallström will also be in favour of them.
Ultimately, we want a cleaner environment.
This can be achieved by the introduction of tradable emission rights without directly interfering in the economic structures.
In the final analysis, we should fulfil our collective responsibility to manage God' s creation in a responsible manner and without any hesitation.
Mr President, Commissioner, firstly I would like to thank the rapporteur for having reliably compiled all our views producing an excellent piece of work.
The subject of emissions trading entered the debate on climate as part of the so-called flexible mechanisms.
The European Union did not actually want these to be included in the selection, but they are now part of an international agreement, and regulations are being drafted in The Hague for these flexible mechanisms, of which the trade-off in emissions is an important one.
As the EU has been a leading force in these international discussions until now, we must all certainly hope that this position of leadership will be kept up, and we place our trust in the Commission in this.
For this reason, the European Union has decided to propose that we should adopt a system of trade-offs in greenhouse gas emissions within the Union as from 2005, and this is therefore different from what the Kyoto Protocol itself makes possible, which is that the international emissions trading is to start as from 2008.
But within the European Union this system can be tried out and it can be developed.
The Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market therefore also welcomes the Commission' s Green Paper and the fact that a framework directive is to be drafted based upon it.
This emissions trading operation, to be carried out at EU level, is absolutely justified, as, otherwise, competition will be distorted.
I wish, on behalf of the committee, to focus attention on the fact that a lot can certainly be done through a system of trading, but not everything.
It is very important that emission trading are one of various ways to solve the problem, the most important of which are financial control mechanisms.
It is also very important that the trade in emissions is monitored effectively, and I believe that we will also need environmental inspectors, which is the subject of talks we are now conducting with the Council.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy also sees emissions trading as a reasonable solution.
However, we also believe that it should only apply to 50% of the total reduction in emissions.
The key point about emissions trading is that in future not only electricity and gas will have a price, but also CO2.
That sounds very simple, but it means a total revolution in the energy business, in the energy sector.
We need to be aware of that.
It will have enormous consequences and I am convinced that it can also help to reduce emissions.
What is the likely scenario for the next few years?
I hope that following successful completion of the negotiations in The Hague, the European Union will ratify the Kyoto Protocol.
That means that we will be legally committing ourselves.
The next thing required is for the Commission to bring forward a directive sharing the burden among the 15 Member States.
So we need quotas.
But these quotas must be linked with sanctions, otherwise they will be meaningless.
In other words we will then have a common energy policy via environment policy, which would be a very circuitous route.
We could then start emissions trading within the European Union in 2005.
Once more, I hope that we will be able to adhere to this scenario, more or less, and that we will not let ourselves be put off by the fact that others, perhaps even the United States, will not have signed it for the time being.
We should support the Commission here and present a united front as far as possible.
Mr President, it is high time the European Commission produced a concrete programme to curb the greenhouse effect.
Climate change is evident all over the world and we in Europe are not so badly off as those in other regions - I have in mind the West Coast of America and also Bangladesh.
But the latest disasters in Italy, especially in the Valle d'Aosta, and in Switzerland, have demonstrated that there can even be terrible disasters here now, disasters for which the local population has virtually no responsibility.
We now need to implement the Kyoto objectives and the next climate change summit in The Hague must go further than our efforts so far.
Since it is also clear that CO2 bears most responsibility for climate change and traffic is increasing further, what we need above all are concrete proposals for limiting urban traffic, and for appropriate taxation of transit traffic or for suitable road pricing arrangements.
We now need measures that go beyond emissions trading, so as to come to grips with all of this.
I do not want to question or attack mobility, it is something we need, but we must change traffic patterns, and emissions trading must not mean that we stop discussing other concrete measures.
We in Europe are in the vanguard of environmental policy and if we want to maintain our credibility then we must go further than is proposed in the White Paper today.
Mr President, I want to put on record the European Parliament's concern and apprehension on the subject of the Hague Conference.
Firstly, as was mentioned earlier, there is the question of the participation of MEPs in the conference at all.
Whatever European Union policies flow from this conference at The Hague will have to come to this Parliament for debate, amendment and agreement, that is the European policies.
National policies, whatever they are, will have to go through national parliaments, but we will have a hand in agreeing whatever comes forward as a European Union policy as a consequence of The Hague.
So far our promised participation in the EU delegation has been limited to three parliamentarians.
At the same time the exact nature of parliamentary participation is very unclear.
We would like to be able to send a bigger delegation.
We realise that COREPER is going to wrestle with this next week but we look forward to hearing any news from the Commissioner on this.
We would also like our representatives to be briefed before the conference.
I hope we can have a full briefing from the Commissioner, we will hear about that in a moment, and to receive all necessary briefing during it.
But that is not all: we need our representatives to be present at all the EU delegation meetings, including those where tactics and policy are discussed.
We do not believe that in asking for this we are asking for too much.
Given our involvement in the making of European Union law it is absurd for the Commission and Council to keep the negotiations to themselves.
Secondly, there is the question of how far the industrialised countries, including the United States, are really sincere about COP6 and the ratification of Kyoto.
Do they, and in all honesty do we, really want to go forward or are we about to witness a slamming on of the brakes?
We already seem to have devastating evidence of the impact of climate change, yet, when members of the Committee on the Environment had a recent meeting with members of the United States Congress, fortunately via a video link, the impression they gained was that Congress will not agree to the ratification of Kyoto.
Now, if the United States cannot agree such pro-environment measures when its economy is prospering to such a great extent, what chance will we have another time, when things may not look so good?
We would welcome the Commission's views on how far the Americans are likely to sabotage The Hague Conference, and what we may salvage from the wreck.
If the United States gives strong signals that it will not, ever, ratify Kyoto without the participation of the major developing countries, then what prospect is there that we could put together a coalition of countries that will ratify, and what danger is there that we would then put the European Union at an economic disadvantage?
We would also like to hear from the Commission a clear timetable of its plans for climate change measures next year.
I realise that this may mean lifting the veil on the 6th Environment Action Programme, but this would be an opportune moment to clarify the broad lines of what we may expect.
Finally, given that we know the causes of climate change, or are fairly clear that we know the causes of climate change, future generations will hardly forgive us for being so slow to deal with it.
Governments are afraid to tax fuel for fear of not being re-elected.
That is human and perhaps unavoidable. But we could at least devote more resources to developing alternative, renewable energy sources, and to making them into real alternative options soon.
How sad it is that last year we actually cut the European Union fund for renewables, SAVE, to which we now devote a fraction of the money spent on subsidising tobacco.
Future generations will not forgive us for that, and future generations will be right.
Let me first of all thank the rapporteur, Mr Moreira Da Silva, who has produced two excellent reports on our current climate change strategy.
Let me also express my appreciation for the continued importance the European Parliament attaches to the global problem of climate change.
I welcome the comprehensive debate on this issue today. This debate is particularly opportune as key decisions are to be taken only four weeks from now at the sixth conference of the parties to the Convention on Climate Change - the so-called COP6 - in The Hague.
As you know, the European Union strongly supports the entry into force of the Kyoto Protocol by 2002 at the latest, which will mean Rio plus ten years.
The European Union intends to ratify the protocol as soon as COP6 is successfully concluded with decisions that safeguard the environmental integrity and credibility of the protocol.
To achieve this, it is essential for the European Union to play a strong and proactive leadership role.
In this regard I would summarise the main objectives of the EU for COP6 as follows.
First of all, we need to ensure that action is taken at home by industrialised countries.
Industrialised countries emit most greenhouse gases and have a responsibility to show leadership in tackling climate change.
The outcome at COP6 should ensure this by balancing the use of Kyoto mechanisms such as emissions trading with domestic action - supplementarity - and by addressing the need to demonstrate progress on policies for reducing emissions by 2005.
Secondly, we need to make sure that the Kyoto targets are respected.
Industrialised countries agreed on reduction targets under the Kyoto Protocol.
To ensure these targets are met we need to agree at COP6 on a solid framework of rules for the Kyoto mechanisms and a strong and effective compliance system.
These are necessary to make the mechanisms work effectively because markets can only work efficiently in a solid institutional framework.
Thirdly, with regard to keeping the targets meaningful, the European Union has serious concerns about the inclusion of sinks because of the scientific and other uncertainties and risks associated with them.
It also has concerns about the potential scale of sinks because this affects the need for action by industrialised countries to reduce their emissions.
Unless these concerns are met, we cannot agree to include additional forestry and land use activities other than afforestation, deforestation and reforestation.
Sinks should not be included in the CDM - the clean development mechanism - because this is a mechanism that should be used to bring social and economic development to countries.
Fourthly, we need to address the needs of developing countries and the economies in transition by promoting capacity building, transfer of technology and assistance for adaptation.
In this regard, the needs of the least developed countries merit particular attention.
At COP6 we should develop these issues and agree that the clean development mechanism should be based on safe, environmentally sound technologies which will help these countries develop in a less polluting way.
I welcome the participation of Members of the European Parliament in the Community delegation to COP6.
A final decision concerning the number of MEPs to attend COP6 is expected by 31 October; the Commission has proposed that the European Parliament be represented by eight Members.
Taking into account the institutional rules for such participation, these Members can attend plenary meetings, and I can assure you that my staff and I will do our utmost to inform all Members present at COP6 on the negotiations which are not open to observers, on a regular basis.
I can also give a commitment to organise an appropriate briefing before COP6 starts, maybe between 7 and 11 November, if possible - we will try to arrange that in the best possible way.
Let me also comment on the question about ratification without the United States.
The European Union is very committed to the ratification and entry into force of the protocol by 2002 at the latest.
On every occasion we urge the other parties, particularly the US and Russia, also to start preparing for ratification.
While theoretically the protocol can enter into force without the US ratifying, it would clearly be the second best option not to have the world's biggest emitter of greenhouse gases included in the regime.
Also, this would most likely have significant effects for EU competitiveness.
I am pleased to note that the Commission is supported by Parliament and the Council in its efforts to build up an effective European climate change programme.
The opinion of the European Parliament's Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy on this programme stresses that policies and measures should be the priority of EU climate change strategy.
It is important that this strategy is endorsed by all stakeholders and that is why the Commission has embarked on this multi-stakeholder process in the framework of the climate change programme.
The Environment Council recently adopted conclusions on policies and measures to limit emissions of greenhouse gases, confirming the choices made in the framework of the European climate change programme.
At the same time they indicate some specific priorities in the transport, energy efficiency and industry sectors that should be developed, taking into account the environmental impact and cost-effectiveness of these measures.
These suggestions will be carefully considered in the ongoing work in the European Climate Change Programme.
As you know, the programme is up and running and the six existing working groups - flexible mechanisms, energy supply, energy consumption, transport, industry and research have been operational since last June.
Right from the start the European Climate Change Programme has been a challenging integration exercise bringing together Commission services, industry, NGOs and national experts.
The first impression is certainly positive after the first four months.
A constructive attitude has developed in the different groups.
A progress report on this programme will be the basis for my oral presentation at the special Climate Council on 7 November.
Despite the very short time available, the programme is already suggesting a first list of likely measures in all the relevant sectors.
The promotion of combined heat and power and of renewables, the encouragement of the switch to fuels with a low carbon content, support for energy efficiency in buildings, awareness-raising in transport, improvements in light-duty vehicles, measures to control leakage and the recovery of fluorinated gases are among the preliminary proposals emerging from the European Climate Change Programme.
At the end of its consultative process, by next summer, the Climate Change Programme will have given impetus and will have accelerated existing proposals.
But, at the same time, it will have promoted new ideas.
Therefore, this Climate Change Programme is a unique opportunity to bring together all the elements of an ambitious EU climate change strategy and the Commission will follow-up by finalising the most promising proposals.
On the Green Paper on emissions trading, I would like to thank Members for having considered it so substantively.
The Commission is eager to hear the views of stakeholders and of course those of the European Parliament.
Differences of opinion on the details should be expected when approaching a new instrument in environment policy and I warmly welcome the supportive and constructive attitude that Parliament has taken.
Emissions trading is a new concept and there is understandable mistrust in some quarters.
I hope that the Green Paper has gone some way towards overcoming this mistrust.
Emissions trading within the European Union would be another policy measure that would coexist with other policy measures that are now in place or are being developed by the Commission in the context of the Climate Change programme.
The Commission is not putting all its eggs in one basket.
Significantly reducing emissions will require a whole range of policies and measures.
For the purposes of furthering the discussions within the European Union, the Commission outlined a vision of how emissions trading would work.
It was most certainly not a definitive outline.
While it might be felt that the Green Paper was weighted towards given options, the Commission's motives are primarily to have an open mind towards this new instrument and to advocate a prudent, cautious, stepwise development of emissions trading within the EU.
It was this caution that prevented the Commission from envisaging from the outset that all greenhouse gases and other sectors, including the transport and household sectors, should be subject to emissions trading.
Ultimately a scheme that is shown to work can be extended, but first the system has to prove itself.
I do not think that emissions trading favours nuclear power more than any of the other climate change measures that are being considered within the European climate change programme.
It is not envisaged that nuclear power will be included in an emissions trading scheme.
The case for getting started by 2005 remains as strong as ever so that the Community can benefit from learning and by doing.
Indeed Member States are already moving and the Community's common interest should be kept at the forefront of our minds.
Moreover, it is my intention - and I have already had talks on this last October - to involve the central and eastern European countries in any future emissions trading regime.
Finally, the responses to the Green Paper that have been received so far - about 50 in number - reflect the high level of interest in this instrument.
Opinions on what to do next vary and the Commission will decide how to move forward within the next few months, after the submissions have been analysed in more detail and when we know the results of COP6.
It has always been and remains the Commission's wish that whatever the Community does on emissions trading should be fully compatible with the Kyoto Protocol's emissions trading system when it comes into effect.
As you know, the EU system would come into force in 2005 while the Kyoto international trading would not come into force until later.
In conclusion, I can express general support for your resolutions and I should once again like to express my thanks and appreciation for the constructive efforts made by Parliament to raise awareness of climate change and the support it gives to the Commission on implementation.
Commissioner, allow me to focus for a moment, in the context of Mr Da Silva's excellent report and the situation which she has just described, which is important and full of potential for the future, on a phenomenon which is assuming dramatic proportions: the floods which affected huge areas of Europe last week, primarily northern Italy but also France and Spain.
We are acquiring the habit of describing our times in dramatic language: verbs such as to overflow, to flood, to burst banks, are part of a vocabulary which is becoming almost the norm.
We feel that this is a dramatic consequence of the climate change taking place and that the social and economic system must provide some sort of response to this.
Even the climate experts tell us that the very meteorology of our regions is changing.
The exceptional amount of rain which has fallen over the last few days has served to offset the prevailing drought of the past year.
We are told that the drought trend will continue into the years to come and worsen as time goes by, unavoidably interspersed with the odd deluge and resulting floods.
And so, now that, sadly, our dead have been buried, the journalists have left the devastated areas and the river, in this case the Po - I live by the Po - is again taking its normal course, it is time, as we say in Italy, to put up our umbrellas, not to appear prophets of doom but to evaluate once again the requirements and the remedies.
Certainly, a great deal of progress had been made in recent years in the area of alert and alarm measures, which have made it possible to keep the scale of the disasters in check, but although this is important, it cannot be considered a primary factor.
We need a defence policy dedicated purely to following up the recommendations of the experts.
We need to be making political and regional planning decisions that protect the earth even when the sun is shining.
I would therefore stress a few points.
The first concerns the approach to man's built environment, which must not be overlooked.
Construction must be oriented towards ever more stringent application of planning rules, standards and controls.
In particular, there must be greater emphasis on man's agricultural environment.
In the recent flooding of the Po, farmland acted as a floodway, protecting the urban centres, and agriculture channelled off the floodwater, bearing the brunt of it itself in order to protect built-up areas.
Therefore, we must reaffirm the role of agriculture as the protector of the environment, a role which is wont to be sidelined, overlooked and undervalued on sunny days.
There is no provision in agricultural or environmental policy or in town and country planning for this role played by agriculture.
Europe needs to pinpoint appropriate forms of coordination in this regard.
Mr President, there are three important documents we have to discuss today concerning one of the greatest challenges by far that we face, that is to say climate change.
For a northerner from an area where the temperature at this time of year rarely exceeds seven degrees and where it pours with rain, the thought of a warmer climate perhaps appears attractive at first sight.
It is not as simple as that, however.
The climate changes we face are hardly positive in their implications for any of us.
Instead, the scenario is exactly as it was described just recently: full of storms, rain and floods. To these must be added changes to the flora and fauna.
Life will have changed out of recognition, and it will scarcely be very pleasant either.
The three documents on climate change which the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy has dealt with may be regarded as documents representing different periods of time.
The resolution on the conference in The Hague is that which is closest to us in time.
It presents the view of those of us in the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, and hopefully also the view of the European Union, of what we think must happen in The Hague.
It has been characterised by considerable unity, which is a good foundation to have now that the conference in The Hague is beginning.
The resolution signals a clear need for the Kyoto Protocol to be signed and for it being the industrialised countries which must head up the efforts to halt climate change.
It also emphasises very clearly that the flexible mechanisms must only be complementary to the national measures adopted.
I am glad to hear that this is also Commissioner Wallström' s view.
I think the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy has given a clear message that we do not consider three representatives from the European Parliament at the conference in The Hague to be sufficient.
I am also pleased that Mrs Wallström says that the Commission' s proposal is for eight representatives.
The European Parliament and those within Parliament who work on environmental issues must be taken seriously at some stage and not only be used along the lines of figureheads when it is convenient.
When regular meetings and regular updates during the conference in The Hague are talked about, it is also important to emphasise that these must be constructive.
It is important that MEPs' viewpoints should also be taken on board so that it is not just a case of one-way communication.
The resolution on emissions trading is a good document, but it has been further improved following the amendments tabled by the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy.
The most important additions include the clear indication, exactly as found in the COP 6 document, that emissions trading itself must not represent more than 50 per cent of the measures to reduce emissions.
It is also important that measurable objectives be required for each country and for each sector. There must also be legally binding measures obliging the Member States to comply with their quotas.
There is also a certain amount of concern about the fact that certain sectors have been left out of the Green Paper, for example the transport sector.
We presume that this work will be included in the next document, concerning the strategy and measures to be adopted by the EU to reduce emissions, and that the transport sector will not be forgotten when we discuss climate change.
The message is very clear: the principle must be that all emissions, no matter what their origin, must be covered by some instrument of control, be it in the form of emission rights or of legislation, but there must be practical limits and instruments of control for each type of emission.
Many have had doubts about the proposal for emissions trading, especially when it comes to the socio-economic consequences.
The fear, quite simply, is of a loss of employment and a concern that companies will play different industries off against each other.
I believe we have taken account of these doubts and of this concern in paragraph 13 of this resolution, and I hope that this will reassure at least some of those who have felt concern.
I want to emphasise that there is an obvious mistake in the Swedish version of this paragraph.
Only half of the amendment published in the Swedish document has been adopted.
The third document is perhaps the most important in the long term.
It deals with the strategy and measures to be adopted by the EU in order to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases.
It also concerns what is really required, namely to change our own way of life if anything is to be achieved. This is a welcome document.
It would have been still more welcome if it had been clearer and more practical, but we hope it will be clearer following the amendments adopted by the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy.
Mr President, Commissioner, I am very pleased that the debate on climatic change in Europe and throughout the world has given us the opportunity to recall the cyclone that struck a large part of Europe.
Christened Josephine by the German meteorologists, this cyclone struck north-west Italy, especially my region, Valle d' Aosta, causing tremendous devastation.
In three or four days, between 500 and 700 mm of rain fell over a total area of 10 000 km2, which is roughly equivalent to the entire rainfall for one year.
Terror struck Valle d' Aosta and the other regions and countries affected, which this terrible ordeal has placed in a veritable state of emergency, facing a long, costly list of damages.
So, why does the European Union exist, if not to make us change our lifestyle and, above all, to understand the cycles that modify climatological conditions, to harness the necessary European funds to respond to the demands meet the acute need for intervention in the mountainous regions of Europe.
If we do not intervene, we unfortunately run the risk that these floods will recur.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, our climate is already changing.
Over the past one thousand years, we have seen a drop in the temperature by one-fifth of a degree.
But over the past fifty years, it has become one and a half degrees warmer.
This warming process is accelerating all the time.
Many citizens like the idea of a climate one or two degrees warmer, but the warm Gulf Stream which is giving us a pleasant climate at the moment could turn at any time.
Europe would then acquire a climate like that in Canada, where, for many weeks during winter, the temperature is between -20 to -30.
We need radical measures to stop global warming.
The Kyoto Protocol is too restricted.
The increase in air traffic in the next fifteen years alone will cancel out the reductions achieved via the Kyoto Protocol.
China is already emitting more greenhouse gases than is sustainable.
We cannot turn a blind eye to this.
After 2020, developing countries too are supposed to fight greenhouse gases, but on an equal footing.
Each world citizen has the same right to emit CO2.
American citizens should not be entitled to emit two hundred times more CO2 than people in East Africa.
On the basis of equity, the international trade in CO2 certificates is supposed to be going ahead after 2008.
Only on this basis will developing countries, such as China and India, get involved.
Opting in The Hague for the American line of grandfathering will block this route.
Energy efficiency and renewable energy sources are the way forward, both in the North and in the South, and not 25 cm high bushes, as the Australian government is proposing, or other forest projects which cannot be verified.
Subsidising nuclear energy with Clean Development Mechanism funding is not the answer either.
That would be perverse at a time when America and Europe are doing nothing but closing down nuclear power stations.
Fortunately, our ministers and the Commission are on the right side.
I wish them tenacity on behalf of my group.
The swift ratification of the Kyoto Protocol is the right way forward.
We should not rely on the American Senate.
After ratification, CO2 emission will have a price tag.
At present, it is still free to the large industries and the electricity producers in Europe, which are, together, responsible for 45% of CO2 emissions.
The Green Paper on greenhouse gas emissions trading within Europe is an excellent initiative.
Europe must make every effort to achieve this 8% objective.
I would call on the European Commission to come up with extra proposals to curtail emissions in the transport sector.
Only if we achieve this 8% objective can we be credible.
And only then are climatic breakthroughs at world level possible.
Mr President, as we all know, climate change is perhaps the most difficult environmental problem of our time to solve.
This is not, of course, because we do not know what changes are required, but because the necessary changes would have such massive repercussions upon the whole of our transport and energy policy and, in point of fact, upon our whole method of consuming.
We face completely fundamental social changes if we are to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases.
It is the most developed countries - the countries with the highest economic standards and the highest per capita emissions of greenhouse gases - which have the biggest responsibility for taking the lead where reductions in greenhouse gases are concerned.
In the run-up to the conference in The Hague, it therefore appears absolutely crucial to involve the United States in an agreement which leads both to real progress and to a situation in which the Kyoto Protocol can be ratified.
A responsible policy on the part of the most developed countries must be based upon those countries' being able to reduce their own emissions.
If there is to be a place for emissions trading, which is something I am very doubtful about, the latter should only constitute a minor part of the policy as a whole, in which case any such trading must also be strictly controlled, with consideration given to the social dimension and to the opportunities for developing countries to make further progress in the future.
This system may entail very large risks in the future if Russia and the developing countries are included in the emissions trading and the practice becomes global.
However, there are other types of flexible mechanism which can be used to advantage at a global level.
Emissions and abatements trading are no substitute for the real changes required.
The same applies, of course, to nuclear power.
Instead, we need a vigorous policy to promote lower energy use, renewable energy sources, alternative fuels and effective environmental taxes on methods of transport.
It is mainly the responsibility of the individual Member States to implement these measures.
Where tax is concerned, a common minimum tax is to be desired.
If it is not possible to agree upon a tax on greenhouse gases within the EU, those countries which are prepared to take the lead ought in any case to get together and introduce such a tax.
When it comes to Mr Moreira Da Silva' s reports, we agree with the content of most of the paragraphs, but we are more sceptical about emissions trading.
A system of that kind may be an interesting experiment at EU level, but it is no substitute for other measures.
Mr President, in recent years we have witnessed an exponential increase in disasters on our territory: natural disasters which, in many cases, have caused havoc over entire regions and countries, natural disasters which are not entirely due to climate change - itself caused by interference from man - but which are also the result of changes made by man to the land, brought about by administrations, governments and citizens who have failed to make better provision for the environment, preserve it and guarantee its future.
This year, Italy suffered first the tragedy in Calabria and then the current colossal tragedy, which has claimed over 25 deaths and left over 45 thousand homeless in the north.
The Valle d'Aosta, Piedmont and many areas of the Po Valley and Lombardy were particularly hard hit.
Last year, the tragedy in France destroyed hundred-year-old forests: an immeasurable loss for mankind.
Mr President, five years ago, Italy suffered another great flood.
Houses, bridges, roads, factories, shops and entire villages were destroyed on that occasion too.
At the time, in my capacity as an MEP and member of the Alleanza Nazionale party, I asked the Commission to immediately prepare a measure identifying the areas at risk from flooding and to draw up a hydrogeological map of the regions of the European Union.
Five years have passed, we are discussing another flood and there is still no hydrogeological map.
Europe has done absolutely nothing to intervene and it has not put any pressure on the national States to change and improve the situations in the individual countries either.
We are now proposing this map again, in the hope that we will not still be here, five years from now, counting bodies and reproaching ourselves for not having done our duty: a map of the areas of the European Union at risk, a directive laying down safety standards for buildings constructed beside rivers and streams, establishing operating criteria for forest management and preventing the working of mines and quarries in sites which are at risk, with penalties for those who authorise them and those who exploit them.
We have to realise that preventing hazards which contribute to ecological change is the best way to protect the environment.
This development, rural development included, must be environmentally friendly, for what is environmentally friendly is human-friendly as well.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the changing climate in Europe has been causing natural disasters for a number of decades now, and these disasters have not yet been sufficiently analysed and evaluated.
Padania, which is the most advanced geopolitical and cultural area in Europe, has suffered tragic flooding that has taken a huge toll on human life and property.
The Italian government, which has set aside ridiculously small sums given the scale of the disaster - of which, moreover, warning was given - in a key production area for Italy and Europe, is treating these hard-working people inappropriately, irresponsibly and inefficiently, as it did the people affected by the earthquakes in Umbria and southern Italy.
No preventive or hydrogeological work of substance has been carried out thus far.
Europe must provide a guarantee, it must call upon the Italian government to recognise the full scale of the damage suffered by the undertakings - which must, moreover, be exempted from paying any form of tax relating to this - and the citizens who, with the aid of a hard-working, exemplary Padanian volunteer force, immediately set to work to restore a semblance of normality.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, first I would like to sincerely thank the rapporteur, Jorge Moreira da Silva, for his excellent work and for his report.
Climate protection is not a marginal subject for environment freaks, it is one of the greatest challenges of our time.
The dreadful storms and floods which have ravaged Europe and the rest of the world in recent months should be a wake-up call for us all.
Nearly all the scientific experts are telling us that these storms and floods will dramatically increase if we do not achieve a marked reduction in greenhouse gas emissions.
So climate protection also makes good economic sense.
That is why it makes me angry that when climate protection and the challenges it involves are being discussed people often just say what they do not want, and not what they really do want.
There is a lack of alternatives, a lack of constructive debate.
A lot of people say that we do not want nuclear energy, at any cost.
Others say that we definitely do not want tax measures.
However, I believe that we must use every possible means of reducing greenhouse gas emissions.
It also makes me angry that when Member States discuss national eco-taxes, although these national instruments are quite rightly criticised, few positive suggestions are made to replace them.
And that is the reason why on behalf of the Group of the European People's Party I have tabled an amendment calling for a European climate tax which covers all greenhouse gases and is revenue-neutral.
We have a chance to correct the mistakes made at national level and to give a positive signal on behalf of Europe.
The Group of the European People's Party also considers that nuclear energy will be indispensable at least for the next few decades if we are to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
Abandoning nuclear energy, as is planned in some Member States, who are actually going ahead with that, gives exactly the wrong signal, because nuclear power stations emit considerably less greenhouse gases than fossil fuels.
Before we abandon nuclear, we have to say how we intend to reduce greenhouse gases.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I too would first like to thank the rapporteur, because I believe that he has succeeded in a remarkable way in reconciling the various interests in this House so as to formulate a position on behalf of Parliament.
Commissioner, I have been following the debate on climate change in this House since 1995.
What I have observed since then is that Parliament has made certain concessions here, but always against the tactical background that we want the country with the highest CO2 emissions to come on board as regards Kyoto.
So we have gone along with this and said that we accept emissions trading.
We are in favour of it in principle and we have made many more concessions.
At some point the hurdle will be so low that I can honestly say that I cannot lower it any further.
It will not be possible to make any more concessions.
That is why I believe that in future negotiations we should really concentrate on the idea that if the USA cannot initiate the ratification process, then we ourselves should enter into agreements with other countries, as ultimately ratification without the USA is not impossible if we are at long last to make some progress here.
We cannot keep making concessions until there are no more to be made if we are not certain that Congress will eventually give its approval.
Commissioner, I of course heard your speech about the European Climate Change Programme, the ECCP.
It was a rather bland speech about what we could all do and how marvellous that would be.
I seem to have heard a lot of bland speeches like that over the last few years!
In the end, I would far rather do battle alongside you for highly specific measures such as a switch to renewables.
There is a proposal to that effect on the table, but I wonder just what the Commission's policy really is when I see the Directorate-General for Competition frustrating this proposal to promote renewables using funds from environmental aid scheme, perhaps to the point of destroying it.
I would also like to fight alongside you to achieve a standard for low-energy housing.
And I would like to battle alongside you to achieve a tax regime to promote cars with low fuel consumption.
So how about finally forgetting those bland speeches, rolling up our sleeves and really getting something done!
Mr President, I am glad to hear that the Commissioner is pressing for eight Members of this House to attend COP6, but I want to emphasise that we want to play a constructive role in EU strategy making.
We do not want to be squeezed out as Members were who attended the World Health Organisation conference recently.
We see ourselves working together at a set of European institutions fighting to improve the situation and ensure that the Kyoto Protocol is ratified.
Compare, after all, our common agreement with the experience we had just recently at that tele-conferencing session with members of the US Congress, which frankly was a very depressing experience.
The chairman of the Health Science Committee spelt out, from the American point of view, that this was an economic issue, not an environmental one.
That really spells out the differences between the approach of the United States representatives and those of this Parliament.
There was no recognition of the need to make sacrifices or to accept that we have historic responsibilities on both sides of the Atlantic as the largest emitters of greenhouse gases.
For all our good intentions, however, it looks as though in the European Union far from cutting CO2 emissions by the end of this decade we shall end up increasing them.
So the prospects for COP6 look poor, but the prospects of our meeting our goals even with Kyoto do not look that good either.
That is not helped by governments across the European Union responding to calls to cut fuel prices.
If we are serious about the environment, these must be resisted.
We should not be cutting fuel tax.
I say "yes" to emissions trading - let us get on with it.
Let us also hurry up with the measures we need to take in each Member State cutting traffic emissions, increasing energy efficiency, promoting renewables and CHP.
The sad truth is we will not succeed in preventing climate change anyway, but if we do not start taking action now, the problems will become all the worse.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, some people are attempting to get the nuclear debate put back on the agenda.
I believe that European environment ministers have so far adopted the very wise approach of excluding it from the list of flexible mechanisms.
Nuclear power is more expensive than other options, such as energy efficiency, for example, and every dollar that is invested in nuclear power is denied to other investments that are much more profitable.
Nuclear power does not really meet the needs of people, who also want to live in heated or air-conditioned homes, depending on the climatic zones in which they live.
Nuclear power does not provide a single solution. But solutions can be found in cogeneration, based on biomass or gas.
Nuclear power is still dangerous.
The accident at Tokaimura clearly showed this.
And fifty years after the start of civil nuclear power, there are still no solutions as to what do with nuclear waste.
We have already invested billions in research and we still have not made any progress.
I fervently believe that we must appreciate the importance of energy efficiency.
We can help the Chinese, the Indians, Indonesia and the Pakistanis much more by giving them the means to buy refrigerators that do not consume much energy, because there will be 800 million refrigerators over the next ten years.
That is what will dictate the CO2 emissions of developing countries, rather than the two, three, four or five nuclear reactors that could be sold to them.
Mr President, the rapporteur correctly maintains that climate change is one of the most serious environmental problems we are facing today.
Although three years have already passed since the Kyoto Conference and the commitment to reduce greenhouse gases by 8% in comparison with 1990 levels, and as the European Environment Agency has reminded us, if very specific political measures are not taken, this reduction will not take place; on the contrary, greenhouse gases will increase by 6%.
It should be considered that emissions from transport could increase the most rapidly, potentially rising by up to 39% by the year 2010.
I also share the rapporteur's concern for specific policies and measures to take priority over emissions trading, which should be ancillary to them.
I do not entirely share Mr Liese's faith and enthusiasm regarding nuclear energy.
I consider, like the Member who spoke earlier, that nuclear energy poses unresolved problems, and the fact that the Commissioner said nuclear energy will not be promoted in the proposals currently being studied reassured me.
In any case, we believe that the priority for the European Union must be specific measures and policies and the definition of a European programme on climate change, which must also have specific objectives and aims, and it worries us that this is not the philosophy that will be advocated at the forthcoming Hague Conference.
In conclusion, Mr President, I, like other Members, will recall the floods in Spain and Italy, which seem to us, like other so-called natural disasters, to be an expression of climate change.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, first of all, I would like to add my congratulations to those already offered to the rapporteur for these two superb reports.
With regard to the first report, I will simply make mention of the floods and the victims that there were in the East of Spain, attributed to climate change, as the previous speakers have already talked about both these things.
With regard to the second report, I consider that emissions trading should be approached as an instrument with which to facilitate the fulfilment of obligations under the Kyoto Convention.
Various attitudes have been adopted in the face of this flexible mechanism: expectant, reactive or active.
I think that from both the economic and environmental point of view we must adopt an active stance.
Reasons for this include the realistic consideration that this will enable us to achieve short-term environmental goals by establishing specific reduction levels, and timetables for fulfilment.
This is also an opportunity to encourage research and development in the field of new technologies for controlling pollution, contrary to the opinion of those who believe that this mechanism is a way of perpetuating the interests of the large polluting corporations.
If this tool is correctly applied, pollution will become more and more expensive and the market will ensure that products obtained through the least clean methods become obsolete.
Likewise, making emissions the subject of trade will lead to greater control over them and, what is more, they will be documented.
This will promote the development of activities with a less significant environmental impact.
It is essential that this mechanism is developed transparently as an integral part of the raft of measures that the Member States is to adopt within the context of the European climate change strategy.
To this end, all the Member States must take great pains to communicate with the public so that it is clear from the outset which objectives are being pursued with this mechanism and what the benefits are, that these are always partial and complementary to other types of measure.
In this way there can be no misunderstandings.
Mr President, Commissioner, a large proportion of the world population, especially in the Third World, will soon need boots to protect their feet from rising water levels.
But recently, in Italy too, the dramatic effects made themselves felt.
The exact relationship between CO2 emissions and global warming is not yet entirely clear, but that should not prevent us from taking drastic measures now.
The precautionary principle is applicable here.
According to experts, we need to reduce current CO2 emission levels by 60% in order to halt climate change.
We are now working towards an 8% reduction, which is already quite a task.
Although we are rightly investing in more sustainable energy and greater efficiency, our intentions are not new.
Yet, we need to establish that our dependence on fossil fuels has hardly fallen since the 70s.
We therefore need to employ all possible means and use them to the full.
That translates into an unqualified 'yes' to the trade in emission rights, provided it is thought through properly.
We still need to find solutions to major economic and political problems.
Emissions trading could lead to a new form of colonialism.
It is easier for rich countries to buy reductions in developing countries and thus acquit themselves of their responsibilities without giving the matter another thought.
Technological innovation will be curtailed as a result.
The success of emissions trading will therefore depend on the price.
If the price is too low, the purchase of emission rights will be very attractive indeed.
Its success will also depend on support.
The trade in emissions must be fair and must be able to rely on a level playing field in the sectors involved.
The market must be deployed in a bid to promote sustained growth as well as fair distribution.
This requires clear political choices.
The Climate Conference at The Hague presents an opportunity to take global steps, an opportunity which we should not let slip.
We must not hide behind the unwillingness of the United States.
Sound cooperation between rich and poor countries is needed to achieve climate objectives.
We must lay down equitable points of departure.
Equal emission rights for all global citizens is not only an equitable step, it is also effective.
It is a means of involving developing countries and of promoting technological efforts.
The Hague must also set an agenda for the future, of which equal emission rights for all the citizens of the world must certainly form a part.
I would like to conclude by thanking the rapporteur for his work and wish the Commission every success.
Mr President, the climate changes caused by our consumer habits have begun.
My colleagues have referred to the catastrophes that are occurring in quick succession and which serve as warning lights that demand practical political intervention.
We welcome the objective and clear-sighted findings of the report by Mr Moreira da Silva regarding the crucial issues and hopes, but also concerning the disillusionment and the renunciations that have infiltrated the battle line in the fight to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
We know that the most important stage will take place at The Hague in November.
We will see whether or not the parties who committed themselves at Kyoto will exercise their responsibilities and meet the demands of the global issues that await us, which put us all in the same boat and spare no one.
Many people forecast a fiasco, however, and even an agreement on the cheap, which will sound the death knell of the Kyoto Protocol.
We refuse to believe this hypothesis.
The European Union delegation must stand firm. It should continue to be the leader, as it was in Kyoto, it should set an example, and it should not give way under any circumstances to the temptations of get-out clauses.
Our mandate is clear and our demands are forceful.
Ratifying the Kyoto Protocol is crucial, as is the implementation of domestic measures that will make a real contribution to the fight against greenhouse gas emissions.
Let us hope that the European Council does not fall into the traps that have been set for it.
The European Union must refuse to integrate nuclear power, even if there is strong pressure in favour of mechanisms for clean development.
Nuclear power is neither a sustainable energy nor a clean one.
It would be just as unacceptable to admit carbon sinks among the flexibility measures.
It would be particularly improper and fallacious to make citizens believe that it is enough simply to plant trees to comply with the commitments undertaken at Kyoto.
With 80% of its electricity coming from nuclear power and with an extensive covering of forest, France, for example, has not achieved the undertakings it agreed to at Kyoto, which are nonetheless minimal at 0%.
Action must be taken in other areas.
The European Union does not have the right to shirk its commitments.
Mr President, the two reports by Mr Moreira da Silva under discussion will be important while the Community prepares for the meeting next June of the parties to the Kyoto Protocol.
Their aim is that the EU will play a leading role in the international struggle to slow down climatic change.
I believe that Mr Moreira da Silva' s work has furthered this aim.
According to an estimate made by the European Environment Agency, greenhouse gas emissions in the EU are expected to increase by 6% during the period 1990 - 2010.
It also states in its appraisal that it is emissions from traffic that are clearly increasing most of all.
Urban traffic in particular is the main focus for reducing carbon dioxide emissions from traffic.
For that reason the committee is encouraging the Commission to make proposals in its new Green Paper to alter attitudes to transportation in densely built-up areas so that greenhouse gas emissions may be permanently reduced.
The committee also considers it necessary to increase financial support for public transport and it criticised the Commission for the fact that policy and action in the EU strategy on a reduction in greenhouse gas emissions are of secondary importance.
This is unacceptable if the EU really intends to lead the world in the process to slow down climatic change.
The EU' s own input is vital, especially as the outcome of the sixth conference of the parties to the agreement cannot yet be certain.
Mr President, now I would like to put things very simply.
I feel that we politicians still have not grasped how serious the situation is with regard to climatic change.
As politicians, we are used to making compromises with regard to almost anything, and we have learnt that the world is shaped that way - shaped for compromise.
But now we have before us a party we cannot negotiate with.
Nature is a hard fact of life: it does not submit to agreement; it just is.
This is such a simple fact that I almost feel ashamed to mention it, but I believe this is the main source of confusion in the way we think.
Mr President, I naturally agree with much of what has been said at great length today, but I would like to draw your attention to a very practical issue, which concerns last week's flooding in the north-west of Italy and in Spain and France.
I am one of the signatories to a joint resolution, to be put to the vote tomorrow, which calls upon the Commission to provide emergency funding from its own budget to orchestrate the operations planned by the national authorities in the areas affected by the floods.
It calls upon the Commission to grant financial aid immediately to the sectors affected, under Article 87, Paragraph 2 of the EC Treaty, and to take into consideration the fact that a large proportion of the areas affected are eligible for assistance from the Community Structural Funds.
This would represent a considerable contribution to reconstruction and, most importantly, prevention operations.
With regard to this matter, it is vital for the Union not to restrict itself to making exceptional interventions once disasters have already occurred, as has already been said.
I would emphasise, in particular, points 6, 7 and 8 of the joint resolution: Europe must call upon the Member States to update their laws on the environment, the abuse of planning permission, reforestation, the revitalisation of mountain areas and, in general, on the promotion of farming methods which are intended to protect and safeguard the land as well as yield increasing quantities of produce.
Clearly, an action of this scale cannot be effectively developed purely at national level, primarily because of the scale of the resources needed but also because of the very nature of the natural phenomena in question which, like those relating to climate change and damage arising from CO2 emissions, are in no way contained by borders.
In asking you to support our resolution, ladies and gentlemen, we are calling not merely for an urgent intervention to contribute to repairing the damage but for a longer-term policy which will make Europe an increasingly safer and more enjoyable place to live for its citizens.
Mr President, the Commission and others have predicted that most Member States will not achieve their targets for limiting greenhouse gas emissions in line with the commitments under the Kyoto Protocol, so it is essential that effective measures are implemented now.
Failure to reach the targets is simply not an option.
One estimate says that 10,000 people have been killed in the past two years because of the effects of climate change, the majority of them in the developing countries.
We need a radical change of direction.
We can, and must, adopt effective and innovative solutions to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and at the same time protect our society and our jobs.
Wales, which is the constituency I represent, is very dependent on manufacturing and heavy industry.
Because the UK is introducing a climate change levy next April, I commissioned research on the effects of this on industry in my own constituency.
The evidence suggests that not only could it keep Britain on track to meet its emissions target, but the levy could actually encourage a small increase in employment.
Several economists have analysed the effects of this on a Europe-wide level, and have come to similar conclusions that there is, or could be, a beneficial effect on employment.
The debate has moved on and we need to look at reducing emissions, not as a threat, but as a challenge and an opportunity.
I hope Parliament's demands which are set out in the reports before us are acted upon and that governments approach The Hague Conference in a positive way so we can see the Kyoto Protocol ratified in the near future.
Mr President, I must begin by congratulating Mr Moreira Da Silva on his reports and immediately declare an interest.
I own some woods in the United Kingdom, the economics of which in the present state of the economy are quite hopeless.
Yet my trees, and those of many others, clean up CO2 emissions discharged by some of the wealthiest companies in the land.
No woodland owner gets a penny piece directly from this important social function and monetary payments for environmental permits and their trading must, it seems to me, have to work their way through to those who actually grow and manage the trees and not be expropriated by exchequers and others on the way.
Obviously, unless forestry pays, nobody is going to plant the trees and if the trees are not planted they cannot clean up the CO2.
In addition, it is quite wrong for the relatively poor industry to clean up the mess left by the relatively rich industry, free, gratis and for nothing.
This in turn offers a potential further income stream for beleaguered farmers and others in the countryside to help rebuild its economic base, which at present, as we all know, is producing too much food at too high a price.
Agriculture is a multi-output industry and public expenditure may well be necessary to achieve the full range of public goods the industry can and should produce.
Given the potential of biomass and other crops for energy generation and for the production of hydrogen, if one contrasts the quantity of money supporting the production of unwanted food, and compares that with support for these alternative outputs and their utilising technologies, the disparity is self-evident.
There is a very strong case for rebalancing the figures because unless new, sustainable agricultural outputs are devised, farming and the countryside's problems can only get worse.
This is as much a matter of CAP reform as it is of environmental policy and it is only by drawing together the two that sensible progress can be made.
Mr President, as some speakers have already indicated - and I congratulate the rapporteur, Mr Moreira Da Silva, on his report - in a tragic coincidence with this debate, nature has decided to remind us of the consequences of climate change.
In the north of Italy and also in my own area - the Mediterranean coast of Spain - the forces of nature have once again unleashed themselves, leading to loss of life and the loss of possessions, in homes, factories and so forth.
On our coast, on the Spanish Mediterranean coast, this is the product of a phenomenon known as la gota fría (cold front), caused by the warming of the waters of the Mediterranean, which generates an increase in water vapour which, upon contact with the cold layers of the stratosphere, produces this heavy rainfall.
It is true that this normally takes place in autumn, but it is also true that this used to take place every 15 to 20 years, while it currently happens almost every year, with tragic consequences at least every three or four years.
Is this or is it not the result of the greenhouse effect and climate change?
Although the experts cannot guarantee it with all the scientific evidence, I believe this to be the case.
We must therefore remedy this situation.
It is true that with the measures contained in the Kyoto Protocol, to which the report we are debating today refers, we will not achieve short-term results, but it is also true that the human race should try to solve the problems it creates.
Other causes - also triggered by human greed - combine with the greenhouse effect, such as building on watercourses, which heightens the damaging effects of these natural disasters.
I am therefore one of the signatories to a motion for a resolution suggesting not only the rapid application of the measures contained in the Kyoto Protocol to combat climate change, but also other types of preventative measures, for example continuing and intensifying efforts to prevent the effects of rain when creating infrastructures, and finally, aid to all the victims, given that they are not responsible for the short or long-term damage caused by human greed and speculation.
Mr President, the joint resolution on the floods calls for civil protection at European level and emergency funding.
However, it should be remembered that the environmentalists are almost alone in fighting to stop construction on floodplains, to bring about the cleaning-up of water channels, to stop the concreting of river banks or uncontrolled excavations, and to call for measures on reforestation and the protection of mountains, the only operations which can reduce the amount of rain water and avoid landslides.
I do hope - although I fear that it will be thus - that in a few days' time, when the floods no longer make the headlines and those who have been flooded out of their homes are left on their own to sort out their problems, that people will not cease to be willing for their land to be used as an overflow area.
I hope I am wrong, but I have a strong suspicion that some mayor or other will object and request that a bank be raised somewhere else: all this against any logic in terms of regional planning or safety.
Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, Europe can certainly contribute, but it is the, sometimes unpopular, decisions taken in the areas affected which will be a true measure of the commitment to attempting to ensure that such catastrophic events are not repeated.
Mr President, everyone agrees about the seriousness of the climate issue, and everyone agrees that the EU must have an intelligent policy for complying with the commitments we made in Kyoto.
I believe that we must go a step further.
It is not enough just to have a good policy in Europe.
I believe that the EU must take the lead in the work being done internationally on climate change.
Otherwise, I do not believe that the climate convention will amount to much more than theory.
In order to take on such a leading role, an aggressive energy policy is required, but the truth of the matter is that the European Union at present lacks an energy policy worthy of the name.
I myself am a member of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy which is responsible for energy issues. I have seen again and again during the last few months the unsystematic way in which energy policy is conducted within the European Union.
Those proposals which are being presented are not part of a coherent strategy.
On the contrary, they are not shown as having any connection with each other.
One month we applaud the fact that deregulation of the electricity market has led to lower prices. A few months later, we complain that the lower prices have reduced the incentives in favour of energy efficiency and renewable energy sources.
These are just a few examples.
An aggressive strategy must include a change to our energy systems.
At the same time, it must also include more active support for the developing countries.
It is, in any case, in the developing countries that most investment in energy production will take place in the future.
I can see that the Commission is doing its best.
As I see it, responsibility for the lack of results lies mainly with the Member States and their governments and is due to their refusal to agree to a common carbon dioxide tax and their refusal to accept the need for a common energy policy.
I wish Commissioner Wallström all the best with her work, but I want to conclude with a question: Does she really believe that it makes sense to implement an aggressive climate strategy without a common energy policy?
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, although the priority in the Union' s policy on climate must be a sustainable environmental policy, in taking decisions we must also pay attention to the importance of the international competitiveness of industry and the undisturbed workings of the Internal Market.
Individual countries are responsible for implementing the obligations of the Kyoto Protocol and the obligations related to the Union' s distribution of the burden.
Different countries' scope for implementing action to reduce emissions varies considerably.
If country-based quotas were allocated to different sectors in the EU, as, for example, Mr Blokland suggested when he presented the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, companies engaged in the same sort of business would end up in totally unequal positions across the different Member States.
Although a given sector might be amongst the world' s best in terms of environmental efficiency in one country, and I can say that is true of many sectors of industry in my country, Finland, for example, it might have to agree to a more stringent quota for emissions than its less efficient competitor in another country.
This would inevitably lead to distortion of the competition situation and, for that reason, we must not impose binding, quantitative targets on different sectors of industry at Community level.
It is essential to promote measures that can be implemented in practice and do not jeopardise the competitiveness of enterprises.
Along with France, my own country, Finland, is at present the only EU country where the building of additional nuclear power stations is being considered.
I wholeheartedly support the building of additional nuclear power plants, as it would give our energy-intensive industry a greater competitive advantage both in terms of economy and emissions.
For that reason we should not adopt a position in this report either in favour of individual forms of electricity production or specifically in opposition to them: instead, all the various forms of energy production must be at our disposal while we formulate national climate strategies.
I would also like to emphasise the importance of voluntary, negotiated target agreements.
In many Member States they have been considered a very effective means of promoting the implementation of climate-related targets.
Voluntary agreements could in particular be a good mechanism for use in the enlargement process.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, in illustrating the resolution proposed by Italian MEPs, I feel that it must be said that, for the second time in five years, we have experienced a natural disaster in the same region of our country, Italy.
This has, on the one hand, allowed us to gain a deeper understanding of the issue, an understanding forced upon us by tragic events but, on the other hand, it imposes upon us certain burdens which are certainly not ours alone: they are not the burdens of one or more affected regions, they are burdens not only of the country but of the international community as well, so that solidarity is displayed and acknowledged at different levels.
And it has been displayed, at least initially, at moral, political, economic and legislative levels.
We expect the Commission to acknowledge the disastrous situation in certain regions in our country and to affect land rehabilitation, in collaboration with the national States, of course, but we also expect it to intervene with legislation to raise awareness at European level, so that the issue of floods and disasters, the victory of ill-omened nature over man and organised society - can in some way be changed for the better.
Mr President, the issue of global warming, although not yet proven beyond doubt, is of the greatest concern for the world at large and knows no respect for national boundaries.
It is very much part of the concept of Gaia, or geophysiology.
As a supporter of free markets and the huge prosperity and freedom which they have brought to countless millions, I welcome the harnessing of market mechanisms wherever possible to facilitate environmentally-desirable goals such as the reduction of CO2 emissions, as proposed by the Commission's Green Paper and Mr Moreira Da Silva's report, which I welcome broadly, and will help, no doubt, achieve the Kyoto targets.
I put down two amendments, one calling for further research into the other greenhouse gases such as methane, soot, CFCs, etc.
I believe that the tradable quota system may need to be extended to these, as in many ways their reduction would be far more cost-effective and less destructive to the world's economy.
The second amendment I put down was for the granting of credits to national quotas for the planting of forests, which, as my colleague Lord Inglewood pointed out before, act as carbon sinks.
They are desirable in terms of supporting the beauty of the countryside and they are also eminently policeable by satellite technology.
I also believe new ideas such as planktonic oceanic seeding, to irreversibly fix CO2 to the ocean bed, need further investigation.
I should like to touch on two controversial topics in the report.
One is the issue of an EU-wide carbon tax, which I reject both because it encroaches on prerogatives on taxation and because it would drive jobs offshore to non-EU jurisdictions, in my view, and be damaging to our economies.
The other is the issue of grandfathering rather than national auctioning of the CO2 quotas.
I personally support grandfathering along US lines to prevent penalisation of existing heavy energy using industries and doubly rewarding those industries which have made energy savings in the past and hence savings on their electricity costs.
Lastly, I too, like my colleague Mrs Kauppi, support nuclear energy as the only long-term solution to reducing CO2.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I want of course to thank you for your constructive contributions to the debate on climate change and on how we are to combat this.
In just a moment, I intend to comment on the floods which have hit Italy and Spain.
I have a statement to read out from the Commission, and shall come back to this in a moment.
First of all, however, I want to round off the discussion about what we believe must happen in The Hague in a few weeks' time by saying that our role must clearly be that of instigating change internationally.
We shall be compelled to be the ones who take initiatives, who force the pace and who, at the same time, build bridges between, in particular, developing countries and countries such as the United States and others in that group.
We must of course force those who are dragging their heels to turn this conference on climate change into a success, as well as show that we are credible when it comes to taking action too.
To answer a direct question, I do not believe that we shall tackle this matter successfully in the long term if we do not have access to a range of tools and a range of political initiatives.
What we are concerned with here, of course, are methods and systems of transport, which must be equipped for the future. It is also a question of energy policy.
I am nonetheless pleased that the Commission has been recognised as having taken initiatives in this area.
I believe that we need more in terms of financial instruments of control.
We also need, of course, to discuss new areas and the integration of environmental and climate considerations into all policy areas.
Again, it is a question of credibility.
Emissions trading merely supplements those measures, both at Member State and European level, which we shall be sure to incorporate into our basic political systems and infrastructures in order to manage climate change.
As has also been pointed out in this Chamber today, I think we are right to be careful when it comes to competitiveness and the socio-economic effects.
This problem must not, however, be used as a reason for not taking action but may even perhaps be turned to our advantage as something which strengthens competitiveness and offers us benefits.
Once again, I want to thank the rapporteur and everyone who has taken part in the debate.
As soon as possible after the conference in The Hague, we shall of course come back with a plan for implementing all these measures, by which time we shall also hopefully have clear, agreed rules.
I hope we shall be able to come back from the conference and say that it has been a great success.
The natural catastrophes which have struck the European Union and its citizens have had tragic consequences.
They have confronted us with severe physical damage and in some cases loss of human life, recently in Italy and now in Spain.
The Commission is acutely aware of the weight of these catastrophes.
This is why the Commission, in the area of Community action for civil protection in the period 2000-2004, is developing initiatives in close collaboration with Member States to prevent catastrophes and educate the public.
On 27 September the Commission therefore adopted a proposal based on a Council decision which instituted a Community mechanism to coordinate measures for civil protection during emergencies.
The key actions included in this decision are: identification of and improved coordination among the key actors to intervene in the case of emergencies; special training programmes to promote better cooperation and complementarity between the actors concerned; establishment of efficient communication systems to allow for better and more rapid communications.
The proposal also permits faster and more effective steps to be taken on behalf of victims.
In the area of research I would like to point out that there are currently several projects under way related to flooding as well as the concerted action to reduce the risks associated with climate.
Finally, although the structural funds are not designed to address the consequences of natural disasters, they can be used for reconstruction projects if the beneficiary Member States allocate the funds for such uses and the region hit by the disaster is eligible.
The possibility of structural fund involvement in cases of natural disaster must fit within the requirements of the funds and the following conditions must be met: the area in question must be eligible for funding under the territorial objectives, namely Objective 1 or Objective 2.
Co-finance projects must involve expenses that are normally eligible for structural funds.
Eligible reconstruction projects may not represent the majority of expenditure in the programme concerned.
The actions must have a transitional nature, one or two years maximum, and they may not continue throughout the programming period.
And the Structural Funds may not be substituted for insurance.
In order to call upon the structural funds for this type of action it must be shown that the programme has room to manoeuvre internally.
It goes without saying that the Member States concerned are in charge and that it is up to them to envisage what type of measure they would like to see eventually financed by the Structural Funds when the conditions for intervention are fulfilled.
With regard to cooperation on spatial planning solutions to flooding problems, the Commission knows that the Interreg III guidelines make specific reference to the possibility of formulating joint strategies for risk management in areas prone to natural disasters and drawing up and implementing integrated strategies and actions for the prevention of flooding in transnational river catchment areas.
The Commission would also expect that flood prevention actions would form part of a transnational strategy which covers areas where flooding is a particular risk under Interreg III.
For its part, the Commission will continue to give prompt and constructive consideration to this type of request.
Let me just finish by underlying the support of victims.
The European Parliament regularly asks the Commission to intervene on behalf of the victims of these disasters.
The Commission is obliged to respond that there is no longer a budget line which permits such measures.
Last September, on the occasion of a resolution regarding forest fires which was passed by your assembly, Mr Nielson announced that the Commission was considering whether or not to propose a legal basis for a budgetary line which would permit the Commission to respond to emergency needs in the Union.
However, the Commission has not yet taken a final position on whether to propose a legal basis for measures in this area.
In any case, our deliberations will need to consider past experience which would suggest that there are two possible courses of action.
The first would be a budget line where appropriations are allocated on a semi-automatic basis but with sums which, at best, can only be of symbolic value.
The second option would be for the Commission to propose a legal basis but this would mean tying up significant sums within heading 3 of the financial perspective.
The Commission would also need to take into account the resource implications of managing any new activities in this area.
Thank you for your contribution to this debate.
At the end of this debate, I have received a motion for a resolution on climate change pursuant to Rule 42(5), of the Rules of Procedure, as well as six motions for resolutions on floods pursuant to Rule 37(2) of the Rules of Procedure.
Mr President, is there nothing in the Rules of Procedure which requires Members to be present to hear responses to points they have made to the Commissioner during the course of the debate?
Surely it is a gross discourtesy to the Commission to behave in this way.
Should this not be something which is raised in the Conference of Presidents?
No, Mr Davies, this is not something one can legislate for.
How MEPs interpret their duties is a matter for them to decide.
I for one am pleased you are still here, but I agree with you that more members should have been present.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 10 a.m.
(The meeting was suspended at 7.40 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m.)
Endocrine disrupters
The next item is the report (A5-0197/2000) by Mr Lund, on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, on the Commission Communication to the Council and the European Parliament on a Community strategy for endocrine disrupters - a range of substances suspected of interfering with the hormone systems of humans and wildlife [COM(1999) 706 - C5-0107/2000 - 2000/2071(COS)].
Madam President, we now have a considerable amount of knowledge of endocrine disrupters.
There have been many suspicions, but many causal relationships have been clarified concerning how endocrine disrupters affect animals and humans.
We know that they can result in lower reproductive capacity.
We know that they can cause deformities in the sexual organs, in both animals and humans, and we know that they can cause severe diseases, including testicular cancer and breast cancer.
However, at the same time, there is still great uncertainty concerning the collective consequences of the many endocrine-disrupting substances.
In reality, then, it is impossible to form an overview of the situation, including the situation where future generations are concerned.
In my opinion, this is a really frightening prospect.
Until now, the attitude has been that there must firstly be an acknowledgement of the risks posed by substances and that action is not taken until the damage has been done.
Naturally, this situation is untenable.
That is why it is a good thing that the Commission has led the way with a communication concerning an EU strategy for endocrine disrupters.
However, I think that the Commission's strategy is a little too hesitant.
It could easily be slightly more ambitious.
I think that what are needed are some more aggressive and effective initiatives in the short term.
And it is this that I am trying to rectify in this report.
First and foremost, it is important that the list of substances that are, or are suspected of being, endocrine disrupters be drawn up and that this be done very quickly.
In the report I have proposed that this should be done before the end of this year.
It is also important that we have the necessary resources for the list to encompass all the relevant substances, expected to number approximately 560.
At the same time, it is essential for the most dangerous substances on the list to be identified so that initiatives can be taken immediately to intervene in respect of the most dangerous substances.
Various measures may be taken: bans, phasing out over a shorter or longer period of years and other restrictions on use.
It ought to be possible to draw up this list of dangerous substances by mid-2001.
In this connection, I believe that it is important to conclude that it must be done without waiting for further testing.
We must also do it through aggressive use of the precautionary principle, in which connection I also think it is important to give consideration to particularly vulnerable groups.
I am thinking of pregnant women, infants and certain groups of workers who run a particularly high risk of being affected by these substances.
I also think that a major effort should be made to establish effective monitoring in the Member States and under the auspices of the EU.
Industry must be required to report on which chemical substances are being put onto the market, in what quantities they are being used and what the expected effects are.
We all also know that more resources must be put into research into both the extent of the problem and the consequences of it, as well as research into test methods and special research on mixture effects and synergetic effects.
We know that these substances can interact in a particularly unfortunate way.
In this connection I also believe that special research into the risks is important and, moreover, that we should ensure that the research is independent, i.e. that we do not base our political initiatives on the producers' own research.
Where research is concerned, we also know that international cooperation is important, including cooperation with the United States and Japan.
As part of future legislation on chemical substances, I believe it would be a good thing if we succeeded in establishing a special framework, some special chapters on endocrine disrupters.
There must be a legislative framework that is based on the precautionary principle and on the principle of a reverse burden of proof.
At the same time, a timetable should be set for the testing of existing substances.
In suggesting a legislative framework, I am also saying that I believe the rules should be binding.
All experience of voluntary agreements in this area is poor.
I would like to thank the rapporteurs for the various groups and thank the Commission for the cooperation we have had in connection with the drawing up of the report.
Regarding the amendments, I will simply point out that my own is a linguistic improvement to Paragraph 15 of the report and that I cannot recommend that we vote for Mrs Grossetête' s three amendments.
I believe that the proposals are largely inspired by the chemical industry, members of which have made the effort to contact me.
The intention is clear: they wish to try to put obstacles in the way of action being taken here and now, and I believe it is important to emphasise that the advice we are getting from the scientific ethics committee is, in fact, advice and that it will not become actual legislation.
It is ourselves in the Commission, the Council and Parliament who must lay down the legislative frameworks, and not the scientific committees.
They serve as advisers in the same way as we receive advice from the other side.
Madam President, I would like to thank the rapporteur for an excellent report and I hope that we can work swiftly on this important problem.
I agree with the rapporteur that it is frightening, particularly the effects on generations to come and the effects on unborn children.
In recent decades, growing evidence has accumulated on the hormone-like effects of a number of industrial chemicals that have appeared in the environment.
These substances have been termed endocrine disrupters.
Endocrine disruption is not in itself an adverse outcome but a mechanism, which may have carcinogenic, reproductive, developmental or behavioural effects.
Some of these effects can be detected using current testing procedures even though it may not be clear whether the disorder has been brought about through endocrine disruption.
The EU Scientific Committee on Toxicity, Eco-Toxity and the Environment has noted that there is a potentially global problem with wildlife.
Equally, the Scientific Committee's opinion on human and wildlife health effects - with emphasis on wildlife - said that the health effects on human beings must be investigated because the associations between endocrine disrupting chemicals and human health disturbances need to be verified.
In general, scientists are suspicious of organochlorine compounds such as PCBs.
The Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy has therefore reached certain conclusions, in particular that all 560-plus suspected endocrine disrupting substances need to be fully evaluated.
We need to look at these in the Sixth Framework Programme.
We need to focus on both women and men.
We refer to the technical term "oestrogen" as well as "androgen" so it is not just a male problem.
Madam President, Commissioner, as regards endocrine disrupters we currently have a lot of doubts, a lot of questions and absolutely no certainties.
These substances can have excessively harmful effects on reproductive functions, whether they be human, animal or plant.
We do not know the maximum exposure levels or the likely exposure times involved.
These substances themselves have not been listed.
That is already a lot of questions.
Focusing on research now will provide us with the means to find answers to all these questions.
Moreover, this is the meaning of paragraphs 3, 6 and 7.
Better cooperation with American and Japanese research authorities is absolutely vital.
A programme of Community research that enables as much information and scientific proof as possible to be gathered must be supported.
In our 2001 budget, we must set aside appropriations on a par with our ambitions for the sixth framework programme on research and development.
This research alone will allow us to take into consideration the specific risks linked to these disrupters in future framework legislation on chemical substances.
The rapporteur - who has produced an excellent report - cites the precautionary principle as the basis for the relevant measures to be taken.
But also in this respect, intellectual honesty must be demonstrated.
The precautionary principle not only leads to the implementation of legislative measures; positive, non-legislative measures may also be introduced.
My amendment aims to make this reality.
I also hope that the opinion of the Scientific Committee on Toxicity, Eco-toxicity and the Environment, which was expressed on 5 September, will be taken into consideration.
The expertise of this scientific committee is well known and it would be appropriate to take its opinion into account before any legislative decision is taken.
I think that it is important that we should rely on the opinions of experts.
The precautionary principle also dictates that we should base our decision on the best scientific knowledge available.
The Group of the Europe People' s Party and European Democrats is henceforth opposed to the motion to shift the burden of proof as of today. I feel bound to repeat this, although this is what I have been saying all along.
So, even though there are no certainties, it is much too early to overturn the regulations on responsibility applied to this matter.
In the case of dangerous substances, authorisation is required before they can be placed on the market.
It seems to me that this procedure is already a safeguard.
I agree with the rapporteur that our Parliament must send a realistic and responsible message to the general public, to consumers, to the Commission and also to industry in general.
Their doubts and concerns are real.
We must provide a commensurate response.
Mr President, I represent the north-west of England which, with the cities of Manchester and Liverpool, is I suppose one of the most densely populated parts of the European Union.
We have a particular problem with marine flat fish - flounders in the estuary of the River Mersey in fact - which are exhibiting extreme intersex characteristics and we do not know what the cause is.
We have a lot of chemical factories around the estuary and suspicion has fallen on them, but the scientists are also looking at the detergents which are used both for industrial purposes and in our own homes.
They are looking at oestrogens - synthetic oestrogens in particular - used perhaps in the pill by hundreds or thousands of women in the region.
Indeed, they are looking at natural oestrogen produced by women in their millions.
It could be a combination of all these things - and this is the difficulty.
We do not know the answers and there are more than 500 chemicals from which we could choose.
I have doubts about the use of the precautionary principle and of course, about the misuse of the precautionary principle - by its nature we never know when it is appropriate to use it or not.
There must be very great concern about the long-term effects of putting thousands of chemicals into the natural environment, but it is difficult to identify exactly which chemicals to target.
The evidence of falling sperm counts, of rising levels of breast cancer, of female polar bears growing penises or whatever gives rise to very real fears and we have to be prepared to ban some substances on suspicion alone, even before we have firm scientific evidence.
I support both the Commission's proposals and the rapporteur's suggestions.
However, we can be sure that there are many disputes to come when we start highlighting chemicals which must be banned.
Madam President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to congratulate Mr Torben Lund on a sterling report which can rely on my group' s unqualified support.
Endocrine disrupters are a relatively new concept.
In my own linguistic area, the term did not become an established concept until one or two years ago.
I know that the Danish equivalent is oestrogen substances and that they have been the topic of discussion for nearly ten years.
The English term is endocrine disrupters and, certainly in scientific literature, they are the subject of a heated debate.
But in German, for example, there is still no term which has become established.
This indicates that the problem is new but no less serious as a result.
We fully back the 2001 deadline.
I fear that the European Commission, under pressure from the chemical industry, will want to wait too long before introducing statutory measures.
Half of the 560 substances which are suspected of having an endocrine disruptive effect are pesticides.
The Commission has admitted this in response to my questions within the Environment Committee.
We ought to start with these.
They should, in any event, not be placed at the end of the list.
Do endocrine disruptive characteristics play a role in the approval of pesticides at the moment?
Unfortunately not.
They do not feature in the so-called uniform principles, although they should.
In my view, this should be put right during the revision of the Pesticide Directive in 2003 at the latest.
I hope the Commissioner is able to give us a response on this issue.
Madam President, I should like to thank Torben Lund for the excellent report which he has prepared and which deserves the full support of the entire Parliament.
The effects of artificially produced chemicals that are discharged into the environment are clear.
There are many examples of damage to the reproductive capacity and development of animals and plants.
One of the more unpleasant examples of this is sexual abnormalities observed in bears in the Antarctic.
This example shows that the harmful effects of various endocrine disrupters is a global problem that has affected even the most isolated parts of the world.
The research results presented by Professor Skakkebæk of Denmark concerning the marked reduction in male sperm quality should also give rise to deep concern.
We are actually in a situation in which young men should have their sperm quality tested to see whether they should start a family before they had intended to, simply in order to be fairly certain of having children.
As Torben Lund so rightly stated, the precautionary principle should therefore be put at the top of the agenda.
It is precisely now that there is reason for using this principle far more aggressively.
With reference to the precautionary principle, we shall be able to introduce urgent measures with a view to avoiding possible irreversible damage to humans, animals and plants.
It is appropriate now to put practice before fine words concerning the protection of health and the environment and to make use of the principle in an area about which we still know very little.
It is the only answer to give to a concerned public.
We cannot be too prompt in implementing the report' s recommendations to the effect that future framework legislation on chemical substances should be based both on the precautionary principle and on a reverse burden of proof.
Madam President, it is now our task, in our capacity as politicians, to make decisions within a very difficult area of health.
I say that, despite the fact that my ordinary profession is within the area of internal medicine.
Far too little is known about the mechanisms of action of endocrine disrupters.
Individual variation is very great.
In addition, sensitivity varies from one period to the next during the human life cycle.
Therefore, we cannot follow conventional routine and establish limit values for appropriate maximum exposure, since such limit values cannot be established in the case of endocrine disrupters.
In our capacity as politicians, we must take the problem of endocrine disrupters with the utmost seriousness.
I consider that the Commission' s strategy document in this area is very good.
We need greater knowledge, research must be given priority, risk assessment must be accelerated and possible replacement substances must be identified.
We need statements from the scientific committee.
The public should be given objective information.
We need consultation with Member States, with industry and with a variety of organisations.
To achieve this, it is reasonable for the Commission to work on the basis of a priority list.
As regards the proposal on the report from the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, I have an important objection, for I do not share the view that voluntary agreements in general are not a practicable way to proceed.
On the contrary, I feel that voluntary agreements can be a faster way to proceed than going down the route of legislation.
Agreements such as time limits on use, restrictions on release onto the market and the phasing in of various risk-free products are often preferable when the circumstances have not been clarified, but where it is valuable to be flexible and to take measures rapidly.
Finally, I would like to emphasise that the legislative methods must always be preceded by a comprehensive scientific assessment and recommendation from the scientific committee.
These assessments and recommendations must be observed by us as decision makers.
It is a requirement of political propriety.
I think anyone listening to this debate who has never heard of endocrine disrupters would be forgiven for thinking that endocrine disrupters were more to do with some science fiction horror story than their own public health.
Yet the reality is that this is a critical public health and animal health issue.
Presently, Community chemicals legislation fails to address the risk that endocrine disrupters pose.
It is a worrying fact that the human body contains more than 100 chemicals which were not present 50 years ago.
Numerous female health problems have been linked to exposure to endocrine-disrupting substances.
There is also a possible link between such substances - as other colleagues this evening have mentioned - with increased incidences of breast cancers, other cancers and the lowering of sperm count.
The impact this may have on the health and reproduction of both humans and wildlife is worrying, with children, pregnant workers and other vulnerable workers being some of the most sensitive groups.
A further problem is the fact that it is almost impossible to set limit values for hormone-mimicking substances.
From the consumer's point of view it has been suggested that the balance of proof be changed to require manufacturers to prove at least a reasonable certainty of no harm before putting any product on the market.
Wider availability of information is also recommended under the right-to-know principle.
There is a need for more research to enable us to act quickly, effectively and with certainty.
The need for a European strategy is critical.
That is why this report is so important.
More information, more public awareness and, most importantly, more research is what is needed.
I thank the rapporteur for this report and I recommend it to the House.
First I would like to express my appreciation for the Parliament response to the Commission communication on a Community strategy for endocrine disrupters and for the work of the rapporteur, Mr Lund.
There is hardly any conference on the topic of chemicals that does not touch on the subject of endocrine disrupters.
One of the reasons for this is the significant potential damage that such substances can cause to animals and human beings and, most importantly, to the unborn foetus and our reproductive capacity.
It is difficult to imagine a more unsustainable trend than one that would lead to deterioration in our capacity to reproduce.
The area of endocrine disrupters is a complex one where there are still many questions to be answered.
There are certain things we know.
For some we can make predictions with confidence and others where we are faced with considerable uncertainty.
What we do know is that a number of man-made chemicals that have been released into the environment, as well as a few natural ones, have the potential to disrupt the endocrine system of animals, including humans.
Among these are persistent bio-accumulative compounds that include some pesticides and industrial chemicals as well as other synthetic products.
Many wildlife populations are already affected by these compounds.
There are adequate quantitative data showing a causal link between exposure to these substances and a reduction in reproductive success in wildlife.
There are also some general conclusions that have been drawn by the research community such as the fact that the chemicals concerned have entirely different effects, as Mr Arvidsson said, on embryos, foetuses and perinatal organisms than on adults and that effects are more often manifested in offspring, rather than in a parent that has suffered exposure.
However, there are also many uncertainties since the nature and extent of the effects of exposure on humans are not well established.
Information is limited, especially on concentrations of contamination in embryos.
The need for further examination of the potential risks of such substances to fill the knowledge gaps so we can take appropriate action is the very reason why I presented the proposal for a Community strategy for endocrine disrupters.
All of us have the right to know and the obligation to learn.
Let me turn to the key elements of the strategy.
The basis for it is the precautionary principle.
I am pleased that Parliament supports the Commission objective to identify appropriate policy action on the basis of the precautionary principle in order to respond quickly and effectively to the problem of endocrine disruption.
This principle and the need to develop quick and effective risk management strategies in relation to endocrine disrupters was also stressed by the Environmental Council in its conclusions of 30 March.
At the same time, Parliament perceives a lack of ambition in the Commission strategy concerning the need to reduce human exposure to endocrine disrupters and protect wildlife.
This I would like to address at the outset with a number of comments.
There are two core components of the Commission strategy.
One is further research and development and the other is the development of agreed test methods.
Regarding research and development, the Commission's main instrument is the fifth framework programme on research and development.
I am pleased to inform you that endocrine disruption has been highlighted as a priority research topic in the latest revision of the relevant programmes concerning human health and the environment.
The Commission is also planning a dedicated call for proposals on endocrine disruption which will serve to further reinforce endocrine disruption research.
The recommendations in the Parliament motion for a resolution will be taken into account.
Regarding the development of agreed test methods, this will require a two-to-four year horizon.
Agreement on test methods aims to ensure that everyone involved agrees that the tests designed to detect the right elements and the test results can be interpreted in a uniform way.
Without such agreement we will constantly be faced, not just with scientific uncertainty but with opposing views on the science.
For this reason we believe that legislative action to reduce exposure in a comprehensive manner, on the basis of the precautionary principle, can be considered only when agreed test methods are available.
Agreed test methods are also necessary to launch a comprehensive exercise in the search for substitutes.
Otherwise, possible substitutes may be open to the same suspicion as the substances they replace.
At the same time we need to take into account existing scientific evidence.
That is why we make provision in the short term to act without agreed test methods on the basis of the precautionary principle and on a case-by-case basis.
Parliament supports the Commission objective to identify a first set of endocrine disrupting substances by the end of this year and to identify specific cases of consumer use and eco-system exposure for special action without awaiting further tests.
An analysis of existing legal instruments relating to endocrine disrupters will also be part of this exercise.
Let me make two comments on this.
First, the Commission objective of the end of 2000 is based on a two-step process: firstly a candidate list compiled by consultants and secondly prioritisation.
Commission adoption of a proposal for prioritisation will follow.
So far, only the candidate list has been completed.
The second step of this exercise involves consultation with stakeholders in which we aim to achieve as wide a consensus as possible on priority substances.
I cannot give a commitment now that all 553 candidate substances will be on the priority list without pre-empting the outcome of the stakeholders' discussions, which are under way.
The Scientific Committee as well as industry have been critical of the candidate list, the BKH report.
In contrast, initial comments received from Member States and NGOs indicate support for the report as a valid starting point.
The Scientific Committee's criticisms of the scientific shortcomings of the report will be addressed in the next stages of prioritisation and further evaluation.
I would like to add here that some of the criticisms are based on the false assumption that a group of 60 substances identified in this report will be the priority substances.
These substances are in fact part of a candidate list of 553 substances on which discussions on priorities are still under way.
It is also important to bear in mind that the list to be established must be a dynamic one.
New substances can be added or indeed initial substances removed as new evidence comes to light.
My second comment in relation to the priority list of substances concerns the request in the motion for a resolution for a decision on intervention on specific cases by mid-2001.
In order to identify specific cases for special action from the priority list, a more in-depth evaluation will be required on consumer uses and eco-system exposure.
In addition, the role of the scientific committees in providing independent scientific advice will be crucial in these specific cases.
It is ambitious to expect to achieve these goals in six months.
However, we will use our best endeavours to work as quickly as possible.
Finally, as you are aware, the Commission intends to present a White Paper on the overall chemicals policy by the end of this year.
We are working on that right now and I have seen the first drafts.
One of the fundamental principles for this policy is to ensure a high level of protection.
Clearly the endocrine disrupting strategy must be consistent with the overall policy on chemicals.
A number of specific elements in Parliament's motion for a resolution, such as the shifting of the burden of proof, a redefinition of the responsibility of manufacturers, a review of labelling legislation and grouping of chemicals for screening and testing, must be and are being addressed in the context of this overall chemicals policy.
The views of Parliament expressed in the motion for a resolution will be taken into account in the White Paper under preparation.
Finally, regarding international cooperation and information exchange, the Commission is organising a workshop on endocrine disrupters in the first half of 2001 with the sponsorship of the World Health Organisation among others.
This workshop will convene all stakeholders to take stock of progress and make further recommendations on the development of test methods and testing strategy, research and the establishment of monitoring programmes.
I should again like to thank Parliament for its support in addressing this issue and I would like to underline the Commission's commitment to implementation of its strategy and to taking on board the elements of the Parliament motion for a resolution in a comprehensive way.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 10 a.m.
Processed fruit and vegetables
The next item is the report (A5-0273/2000) by Mr Jové Peres, on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development, on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation (EC) No 2200/96 on the common organisation of the market in fruit and vegetables, Regulation (EC) No 2201/96 on the common organisation of the market in processed fruit and vegetables and Regulation (EC) No 2202/96 introducing a Community aid scheme for producers of certain citrus fruits [COM(2000)433 - C5-0391/2000 - 2000/0191(CNS)]
Madam President, the Commission has presented a proposal which, under the semblance of a technical adjustment, conceals new budget restrictions for a sector itself already discriminated against within the common agricultural policy.
In recent years, fluctuations in the exchange rate between the euro and the dollar and other circumstances have brought the level of aid down to half the level it was at four years ago.
The Commission' s proposal, however, consists in stabilising aid at the reduced level and granting aid directly to producer organisations, with which the minimum price regime will disappear.
Before the end of the year, the Commission is to submit a report on the operation of the COM on fruit and vegetables, possibly supplementing it with new proposals for reform.
The Commission justifies the proposal we are now examining on the grounds of urgency.
Now, without questioning the urgent nature of the issues dealt with by the Commission, the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has identified other urgent issues and also upholds different figures from those in the Commission' s proposal.
One of the urgent priorities for the Agriculture Committee is the strengthening of producer organisations.
The problem is that, after the 1996 reform of the COM, the producer organisations became its main instrument.
Currently, however, only 40% of fruit and vegetable production is pooled within producer organisations.
A COM that only covers 40% of production does not deserve the name.
Therefore, if there is any urgency, it lies in encouraging the pooling of supply within producer groups.
Since this is an exception in the common agricultural policy and the producers themselves have to cofinance the operational funds, an increase in Community funding is clearly the most obvious instrument for achieving this objective.
The Agriculture Committee has therefore proposed an increase in the percentage of Community financing for certain joint schemes involving several producer organisations under certain conditions, especially in the regions most dependent on fruit and vegetable production, or for associations or mergers of producer organisations.
The differences in the figures between the Commission' s proposal and that of the Agriculture Committee, which was, in fact, passed almost unanimously, basically centre on aid levels and processing thresholds.
The aid requested by the Agriculture Committee may seem excessively high, but we must not allow ourselves to be deceived.
What is happening is that the aid levels proposed by the Commission are excessively low and are intended to convert a temporary situation into something permanent, thus eroding farmers' incomes.
This temporary situation has been brought about by fluctuations in the exchange rate between the euro and the dollar and particular events on the markets.
The Agriculture Committee' s line is in fact limited to restoring pre-1996 aid levels.
Furthermore, on the subject of aid, the disappearance of the minimum price and paying aid directly through producer organisations may cause problems, particularly in the main fruit and vegetable producing countries.
A reasonable level of aid would allow producers' incomes to be maintained in a particularly difficult situation.
To avoid absurd situations of systematic penalisation, the Agriculture Committee has decided to propose setting it at the level of what was produced in recent years.
In this way we hope to tailor the aid to the production structure and the ability of the market to absorb the supply, without running the risk of creating surpluses.
One may ask how the amendments will be financed.
You see, fruit and vegetables currently receive EUR 445 million less than the ceiling set in the Financial Perspective.
It is true that budget neutrality must be respected, but we have to agree on what that means.
In my view, budget neutrality consists in keeping within the limits set when the Financial Perspective was adopted.
The Commission, however, intends to reduce spending to below the all-time minimum.
I believe that discussion should focus essentially on how to achieve the objectives allocated to the COM and thereafter on establishing budget commitments.
It often seems that less is demanded of institutions if they restrict themselves to proposing budget savings.
Our main concern should be to improve the effectiveness of the instruments that we have all built up together.
Without a budget there can be no building of Europe, and the budget for the fruit and vegetable sector symbolises and reflects many of the main social and territorial imbalances in the common policy.
I should like to end by thanking my colleagues on the Agriculture Committee.
Their understanding and efforts were of great help in reaching a final agreement, which enabled me to draw up this frankly rather difficult report.
Madam President, Commissioner, tomorrow Parliament is to vote on the proposal for reform in the processed fruit and vegetable sector.
I believe this reform is necessary, but in its proposal the European Commission is not moving in exactly the right direction.
The objective of promoting supply pooling must be met by encouraging producer organisations.
Last year, as Mr Jové Peres has said, only 40% of production was marketed through producer associations.
Therefore, the amendments approved by the Agriculture Committee and Rural Development, under which up to 50% of the costs of creation and operation can be cofinanced under the EAGGF guarantee for the first five years, answer a need, Commissioner, as does covering the financial aid of 3 to 4.5%, as approved by the Agriculture Committee, of the produce marketed by each producer organisation.
We are not happy with the thresholds proposed by the European Commission, since they should be adjusted in accordance with market fluctuations.
Therefore the approved amendments proposed by the rapporteur on this matter enjoy our full approval.
The list of products should be extended to include those that may be vulnerable to major falls in prices due to the weather or for cyclical reasons.
The Commission' s proposal to reduce the maximum citrus-fruit withdrawal ceiling from 10% to 5% is unjustified and I believe it should not be upheld.
Certain instruments for regulating the market in emergency crisis situations must be introduced to act as a safety net, for example, by exceeding the withdrawal ceiling by about 10% in the event of serious crises.
There is a gap in the area of labelling.
The legislation in force on this issue needs to be changed so that the consumer may be kept fully informed and know whether the product has been made from fresh fruit or not.
This is a request and complaint that consumers are always making.
I support the amendments affecting tomatoes, pears, peaches, cherries, apricots and asparagus, which are of major regional importance and should receive a fixed amount of aid per hectare to improve their competitiveness.
With regard to dry fruit and nuts, especially hazelnuts, the request to extend the period of aid given to producer organisations that have implemented their improvement plans is still valid, as are the measures specific to this sector which are due to expire in the next round even though there has been no change in their circumstances.
The analysis of the reforms, which the Agriculture Committee and Rural Development has so insistently called for, should be submitted by 30 June 2001 so that we can see how the sector has been performing.
These reforms mean a budget increase, but within the line approved at the Berlin European Summit.
The Commission should do its sums again in view of the fact that this ceiling is not exceeded.
The difference between the Commission' s proposals and the European Parliament' s is EUR 151.
Budget neutrality, Commissioner, does not mean that expenditure under the proposal does not exceed what is currently spent but rather that it stays within what was agreed at the Berlin European Summit.
I take this opportunity to congratulate the rapporteur and I applaud the teamwork we have achieved.
I believe this has been one of the proposals most based on give and take and finding a balance that we have seen in this Parliament.
Madam President, this debate is a consequence of the Commission' s proposed reform of three regulations: on fruit and vegetables, products derived from fruit and vegetables, and the aid scheme for producers of certain citrus fruits.
As has been pointed out, the Commission has acted without awaiting the report on the operation of Regulation (EC) No 2020/1996, which, according to the Commission, will be available by the end of this year.
The fact that it has not waited for this document - as would have seemed more natural - and has initiated the reform reveals that the Commission either has little interest in the results of its report or could not care less about its contents.
With this action, one cannot help feeling that the Commission is determined to reform these regulations at any price.
Is the reform that urgent?
In my view, if the question is whether or not the regulations need reforming, the answer is yes; but, on the other hand, if the question is whether the reform they need is that contained in the Commission' s proposal, then the answer is clearly no, because improvements in the operating mechanisms of the sector must not be achieved at the expense of precisely one of the sectors that receives least support in Community budgets.
Since the details given in the report are not known, they cannot grab our attention.
The fruit and vegetable sector accounts for an important share of final agricultural production of some 15%, while the financial effort is small and getting even smaller.
Whereas, in 1995, it accounted for 5.3% of all spending under the EAGGF guarantee, in 1999 it was down to 3.6%.
Added to this are two important details: first the importance of this sector for employment, and, secondly, the frequent concessions affecting the fruit and vegetable sector made under trade agreements with third countries.
We do not intend to oppose these agreements or criticise them, because they are an exercise in solidarity with third-world and developing countries, but it does not seem sensible that the price of solidarity should be paid exclusively by a sector that has never been treated well in Community budgets.
We are going to support Mr Jové Peres' s report without any hesitation.
It is an excellent report - for which we congratulate the rapporteur - which provides a balanced reflection of the various interests and agreements involved.
Its proposals, such as those that correct the most unfair aspects of the Commission' s proposal, may have favourable consequences.
Our support will be unconditional and unqualified.
Moreover, I give this support in the belief that the Council will be more sensitive than the Commission to the reasoned and reasonable proposals of the European Parliament.
Madam President, Commissioner, the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance generally supports the report by the rapporteur, Mr Jové Peres.
We are convinced that the Commission' s proposal is restrictive in budgetary terms, which would mean major financial cut-backs in the sector.
It should be remembered that the fruit and vegetable sector is the first common organisation of the market to be financed by its own producers, so it is vitally important to encourage producer organisations and to support an increase in operational funds.
It must be stressed that the fruit and vegetable sector represents a considerable percentage of final agricultural production in the European Union.
Yet it only accounts for 4% of the EAGGF guarantee budget.
It should also be remembered that there was broad consensus within the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development when this report was approved.
I must mention the predominantly Mediterranean nature of this type of production, which affects several Member States.
It is a sector which directly and indirectly generates a vast number of jobs, resulting in highly dynamic economic activity.
In general terms it is the main source of income for almost two million families in Europe.
It must be stressed that producer organisations, which will be strengthened and encouraged by the amendment introduced by the Agriculture Committee, are extremely important for the rural development of certain districts.
Fruit and vegetable production is closely linked to the Mediterranean culture and diet, the greatest exponent of a balanced, healthy diet for our consumers.
Therefore, an objective that producer organisations must prioritise is the encouragement of quality production.
The fruit and vegetable sector, however, faces an uncertain future due in part to the erosion of Community preference in the Euro-Mediterranean free trade area, which may wipe out all the work that has been done.
We must therefore maintain a constructive and vigilant attitude for the future.
Madam President, the Commission' s proposal for an amendment to the common organisation of the market in fruit and vegetables is exacerbating the problems of the current market organisation and the unfairness of the CAP.
It is also creating greater difficulties for fruit and vegetable growers.
Particularly serious are the measures designed to abolish the minimum price, which affects tomatoes destined for processing, the reduction in the limit for aid for operational funds from 4.5% to 3% of the value of the production marketed by each producer organisation, the precautionary reduction of 9.1% of the amount of aid for the first marketing year following the reform of the COM and a reduction in the citrus fruit withdrawal ceiling.
A sector as important in economic, social and strategic terms as this one, particularly for Portugal, with considerable scope for job creation and for supporting the rural development of huge areas of the countries of southern Europe, deserves special attention, which it is not receiving from the Commission.
The amendments tabled by the rapporteur, Mr Jové Peres, therefore deserve our support, since they seek to correct the unacceptable views held by the Commission, specifically in its proposals against increasing aid to farmers, on increasing thresholds and on resetting ceilings for aid to producer organisations.
Madam President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, after the market organisation in wine and olive oil we now have the market organisation in fruit and vegetables, which is also of concern to the southern countries.
In fact, the majority of speakers have been Spanish.
Our friend and colleague, Mr Jové Peres, has produced an excellent report, which deals with a subject that is both extremely serious and extremely symbolic. It is serious not only because of the numbers involved - almost two million families, or 500 000 jobs are, as we have already heard, affected - but also because, behind the failure of the 1996 reform, there are nevertheless women, men and rural regions which, Mr Fischler, the European Commission has deliberately condemned.
In France, in Provence to be exact, for a holding of 40 hectares of apples, production costs are twice the sales price, which means that a holding producing 40 000 apples loses EUR 320 000 per hectare per annum.
This holding will disappear.
To whom shall we apportion the blame?
It is not the fault of the tree growers; they have tried to form producer organisations and to build up part-financed operational funds.
But in order to do this they need to have revenue and in order to have revenue they must sell.
But they do not manage to sell because the powerful purchasing and distribution groups buy outside Europe - obtaining pears from Argentina and apples from Chile, New Zealand and South Africa.
Supplies are acquired from these countries because they are cheaper, because workers in the southern Mediterranean or the Pacific have no social protection, because customs duties have been abolished, and because the European Commission is suffering from mad diplomacy disease, that is, the disease of global free exchange!
In the name of a global foreign policy, Brussels has sacrificed our tree growers, our market gardeners and our horticulturists, who have become a currency of exchange in the free exchange culture.
The deal is well known: fruit and vegetables, flowers and wine in the southern hemisphere and, perhaps, industry in the north.
So, in the words of Comrade Lenin, 'what is to be done?' .
Obviously we must adopt the excellent relief amendments put forward by Mr Jové Peres, who has produced an outstanding report, and those of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development, without the pretext of budgetary neutrality. There is no lack of money to throw at Kosovo, at the Balkans, at Indonesia and at Asia.
But if we do not put an end to the global drift in European integration, little by little not only will the farmers disappear, but the whole of Europe will drown in the ocean of the global market.
Madam President, Commissioner, when developing any strategy, before starting to distort the past and adopt new operating guidelines, one must analyse how much has been achieved.
It would now seem to be irrefutable that since 1996 - the year which saw a complete revision of the COM in processed fruit and vegetables - there has not been any form of discussion, even though it had always been intended, on the impact of the COM in that sector, despite the fact that it has reached its third year of application: a period of time that has to be seen as long enough for introducing any reform initiative.
The interests of an entire industry are at stake, an industry which employs almost 2 million people in the central southern areas of the Mediterranean countries, universally acknowledged to be among the poorest countries in the European Union.
The fruit and vegetable sector is struggling between production quotas and world-wide liberalisation of the markets for want of a policy for research into biotechnological innovations.
It is the processing sector which feels the effects of the Marrakech international agreements most of all, even though it accounts for 16% of the value of European Union agricultural production.
If the philosophy behind the new COM is to promote the system of associations of producer organisations as an alternative and a complement to the European economic system of large-scale distributors, it would be appropriate for this policy to be bolstered with the financial resources needed to implement the operational programmes, ensuring real financial assistance of at least 4.5% of the marketed production instead of the 3% proposed by the Commission.
In order to be able to continue to work, producers are calling for the adoption of legislation which will support the development of the fruit and vegetable sector, not hamper it.
Madam President, Commissioner, the market organisation in fruit and vegetables was reformed in 1997 and, three years down the line, the results have not lived up to expectations.
Based on reinforcing the economic power of producers, creating collective projects and contracting with public authorities within the framework of part-financed operational funds, the results of this reform have finally proved to be inadequate and disappointing.
The reform has not brought the future we all hoped for at the outset because, in fact, as was highlighted by a previous speaker, the membership rate of the producer organisations has remained very low: less than 40%.
Under these conditions, the producer organisations have been unable to have a real impact on controlling and promoting products in the fruit and vegetables sector.
At the same time, although the EAGGF budget for this sector has been increasing steadily since 1997, it has nonetheless always been tightened during the accounting period because of the actual under-utilisation of appropriations due to the unsuitability of the rules of allocation.
We are thus faced with a paradoxical situation where one of the most important sectors of European agriculture, which covers 20% of production units, employs a great deal of manpower in production and processing, and accounts for 16% of final agricultural production, is ultimately one of the sectors least taken into account by the common agricultural policy.
Against this background, I naturally want to highlight the opportunity provided by the Commission proposal that we are debating this evening.
But I want, above all, to congratulate Mr Jové Peres on the quality of his report, whose judicious proposals aim to improve even more significantly the results of this production channel for the countries of southern Europe, most notably by setting public support at 4.5% of the value of the marketed production and by increasing it in some cases to 6% in order to encourage producer organisations to pool their produce.
Finally, I hope that the Council of Ministers will make a speedy decision in respect of this reform so that it can come into force in 2001 with the appropriate funding.
Madam President, our rapporteur did an excellent job.
It was a difficult topic to deal with in the middle of this crisis which has struck the vegetable and fruit sector in certain parts of Europe.
I subscribe to that analysis, and we must also use that analysis in the forthcoming WTO negotiations so that we can adopt a firm stance in favour of those products which do not enjoy market protection.
These, too, must be protected.
The second point I would like to highlight is the position of the producers.
I subscribe to the rapporteur' s plea to intensify support for the producers and to strengthen their position, and I consider these initiatives to be essential.
For in the present commotion caused by buying-in organisations which operate on behalf of supermarkets, the question could gradually arise of whether there might not be too much merging and amalgamating on the part of these organisations, and of whether the latter might not slowly but surely be securing monopoly positions for themselves.
There is only one possible answer to this: the producer organisations need to adopt a more powerful stance and improve the way in which they are organised.
In my view, this would be more effective than injecting more money into the sector.
The sector must secure a stronger market position.
And I must also say that, in my view, this is more effective, especially with regard to vegetables and fruit, as well as delicate products which need to be sold quickly.
I would like to make a number of observations with regard to the distribution of processing and threshold quotas across the countries.
I have noticed that these are not evenly distributed on a number of counts.
And I am also expecting the rapporteur to produce an oral amendment tomorrow with regard to at least one of the countries involved in the processing of pears.
But if you consider the distribution across the Southern countries, for example the position of Portugal compared to other countries, one can ask oneself whether this distribution is even in every respect.
In principle, I would like to say, and in that sense I would also like to follow the line adopted by our spokesperson, Mrs Rodondo, that it is essential to strengthen the position of producers and for producer organisations to become stronger, because I can tell you, this is necessary; they must secure a firmer foothold in the market, and the policy will need to be drafted to that effect.
While we have a common organisation of the market and claim, on the one hand, that we do not want more money injected into it, this will only be effective if we, on the other hand, also consider the production side and possibly a certain level of control of this.
But in this report, I am precisely in favour of strengthening producer organisations, also by way of responding to this report.
Madam President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, on 12 July the Commission presented a proposal for amending the common organisation of the market in fruit and vegetables, although we are expecting an evaluation report from the Commission in December 2000 on functioning of this very market organisation.
If we change some points now in anticipation of that, the Commission will then have to use this evaluation immediately to review the common organisation of the market in fruit and vegetables and make the necessary changes.
Joining together producer groups and forming producer associations, and commercial cooperation between producer organisations from various regions, are all particularly important for the fruit and vegetables market sector.
This should be the starting point for the COM.
Nevertheless, we also have to bear in mind those farmers who energetically sell part of their production direct to consumers from their farms, for the benefit of themselves and their families.
For many farms, direct sales bring much-needed additional income, and they are often run by farmers' wives as an independent part of the business.
Furthermore, direct sales from the farm emphasise the regional nature of products and thus appeal to a certain type of consumer.
The amendment to Article 11(1)(c) must therefore be framed in such a way that producers, in agreement with producer groups, can sell a proportion of their products - to be agreed on a case-by-case basis - direct to consumers for their personal use.
If the present rigid limit is maintained, producer organisations will be obliged to expel members who do not respect these rules.
The result would be that the producer organisations' sales volume would fall and that they would lose their influence over these producers' direct sales activities, as regards complying with quality standards, observing production guidelines and pursuing joint market strategies.
I therefore ask you to take this into account also.
Madam President, Commissioner, the fruit and vegetable production that concerns us today is concentrated in the countries of southern Europe and accounts for 13% of the final agricultural production of the whole European Union, reaching 25% in most of the producer countries.
In several provinces in southern Spain the proportion is over 80% and it is the only driving force for development and employment in the rural areas.
In addition, this produce has lost Community preference and has to compete abroad without the shelter of compensation that the traditional continental products enjoy, through roughly 70% of the EAGGF appropriations.
Commissioner, this sector seems to be the hard currency used in preferential agreements with third countries and in the subsequent reviews of their protocols, with the added disadvantage that these countries produce without the economic, social and environmental conditions we have in Europe, but with the same timetables as our own producing areas.
This situation is neither fair nor equitable, because it is neither fair nor equitable to have to compete abroad without the protection that continental products enjoy.
Neither is it fair and equitable if the budget neutrality set at EUR 1 900 million in Agenda 2000 is not fulfilled because of internal obstacles and penalties incurred through the regulations.
In conclusion, I believe this proposal clearly leaves room for improvement, and the report by Mr Jové, whom I most sincerely congratulate, sets the standard for doing so.
This would be both appropriate and fair.
Madam President, Commissioner, the Commission' s proposal on fruit and vegetable policy is full of shortcomings and quite inadequate and I should like to highlight four aspects to demonstrate this.
Firstly, the guarantee thresholds for different types of fruit and vegetable need to be raised with a view to harmonising the real production of the European Union and responding better to levels of demand.
This is why I would particularly highlight the need for guarantee thresholds to be raised for tomatoes grown for processing in Portugal, which should at least approach the figure of 953 000 tonnes set at the Berlin Summit.
Secondly, I wish to point out that the level of aid per tonne proposed by the Commission is quite inadequate.
I think that what is needed is an increase of the kind proposed by the rapporteur.
The truth is that the abolition of the minimum price, which is about to end, will result in a considerable reduction in prices paid for produce and we need to ensure that farmers' incomes do not suffer as a result.
Thirdly, the level of operational funds is also completely inadequate.
In fact, as the rapporteur proposes, unless the level of financing the funds improves, we will not be able to improve the way in which producer groups work.
Finally, I wish to say that the Commission has wasted a superb opportunity to make the CAP a little fairer.
As the Commissioner knows, a sector that accounts for 16% of agricultural production only receives 4%, in fact less than 4%, of the budget.
The European Union' s fruit and vegetable producers are at the moment basically living from their income from the market, in other words, from what they sell on the market.
They suffer the risks and uncertainties inherent in the market and are pitted against fellow farmers in other countries, who produce other products such as cereals, oilseed, beef, milk and so forth, and whose income is guaranteed by the CAP, with no risk to themselves.
Commissioner, we must put an end to this inconsistency within the CAP as soon as possible.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, I welcomed the report as it was presented to us and I also appreciated the work of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development on the position to be assumed by Parliament with regard to both the approach taken by past regulations and the current approach adopted by the Commission and the Council.
Clearly, this does not take away the fact that there may be - and in fact are - diverging positions, as there will be tomorrow when the vote reflects this, just as there may be approaches which comprise or support calling for amendments.
It would appear that the Commission and the Council's line takes little account of the methods used to grow certain products with specific characteristics in a specific social environment - as one of the Members who has just spoken also pointed out - with regard to certain sectors: I refer to tomatoes for the processing industry, citrus fruit and also nuts.
I therefore feel that certain subsidies have been particularly depleted, not only by the general fall in the euro which we have witnessed recently - in which regard it would be appropriate to take action before the situation degenerates into a dispute with the European establishment as a whole - but also with regard to the attitude to be adopted in respect of Mediterranean products.
Totally justified protests and accusations have been made recently but, at Parliamentary level, there have been some proposals as well: proposals relating to the ceiling on financial assistance, proposals to standardise the benefits due to all producers' associations irrespective of the legal basis, a proposal - which, I feel, must be supported - to continue support for production for longer than the current three year period, and lastly, for specific products, in particular nuts, the proposal for a particularly fair assessment of the aid or subsidies to be allocated.
Madam President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I have great sympathy for the efforts being made by the Commission and the Commissioner to make savings, which is quite justifiable.
But without wishing to indulge in special pleading, the situation in the fruit and vegetable sector is visibly deteriorating.
Growth in volume, imports from third countries, fluctuations in consumption - be it in quantity or quality - are the most important reasons for this.
The situation is becoming more critical, even if it is not as critical as Mr Martinez says.
For example, you can live very well from 40 hectares in the area I come from, the South Tyrol.
So it is not quite that bad, but nevertheless ...
For example, when you consider that the fruit and vegetable sector is allocated 3.8% of the relevant budget, as compared with the 41% allocated to arable crops, then you cannot help feeling that a decimal point might have been put in the wrong place.
Unfortunately, the decimal point is in the right place.
We are talking about just 3.8%.
This is a handicap that works to the advantage of another agricultural sector, that is arable crops, where there is surely more room for manoeuvre than in the case of fruit and vegetables.
International trade agreements are to some extent at the expense of this fruit and vegetable sector and therefore benefit other sectors.
I believe that this additional financial restriction will be hard to cope with and I hope that the Commissioner, the Commission and the Council will have the insight to make sure that a third handicap is not added to the two existing ones simply because of a desire to make additional savings in a particular way here, and that Parliament's wishes and proposals and those of the rapporteur and of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development will be taken into account.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, before I go into the details of the report, I would like to thank both Mr Jové Perez for his report, and the members of the Committee for the time and effort they have devoted to the 61 amendments.
One thing is clear to me: as with any totally new system, the practical experience that we have gained in recent years suggests that the market organisation for fruit and vegetables must be the subject of a review as well, and it must also be fine-tuned.
The Member States and the representatives of the sector itself agree with the Commission that there are some key problems that we should solve as quickly as possible.
That was the reason why the Commission to some extent anticipated the report and brought forward this proposal for discussion without waiting for the final report.
We concentrated on four areas: the double upper limit for financing the operational fund, the operation of the support system for tomatoes for processing, the level of quotas for tomatoes, citrus fruits and pears, and export refunds.
But the fact that we anticipated these four areas does not mean that we will not present the report required in the COM.
We will do that in any case, and will we do so before the year is out.
However, as I can see from many amendments, you have taken advantage of this opportunity, and in addition to the four subjects brought forward for debate by the Commission, you have also anticipated the final report.
There is accordingly a certain discrepancy between the Commission's views and what you are proposing here.
What principles has the Commission been guided by in producing its proposal?
In view of the budget situation and the Berlin decisions, any proposal that would have led to substantial increases in budgetary expenditure in favour of a specific sector would have been unrealistic.
The proposal is therefore based on the principle of budgetary neutrality.
I am of course aware that appropriations for the fruit and vegetable sector - leaving bananas aside - have fallen since the 1996 reform and that the Agenda 2000 forecasts have also not been fully met.
Two factors are chiefly responsible for this. First, expenditure on support for the operating fund has risen far less than expected, the reason for this being that the number of members in the producer organisations has not grown as much as was hoped, and, second, rising world prices and value of the dollar had to be taken into account when calculating processing aid.
Finally, the Commission proposal aims at extensive simplification, by harmonising the existing processing rules for the most important products and also making them more transparent.
For tomatoes, pears, peaches and citrus fruits, individual thresholds for Member States have been set in addition to the Community threshold, and permanent aid is paid direct to the producer organisations.
One advantage of the proposed amendment is that on the basis of the future aid contribution - which has now been set for an indefinite period - the producer organisations can freely negotiate the price for unprocessed products.
This will make minimum prices superfluous in future.
Furthermore, the introduction of a single guaranteed upper limit for contributions to the operational fund will simplify both the creation and implementation of operational programmes.
With these principles in mind, I would now like to turn to the amendments you have proposed.
As I see it, they can be divided into three groups. The first group consists of general comments on the COM.
Amendments Nos 1, 2, 44 and 19 relate to strengthening the role of the producer organisations, Amendments Nos 8, 14, 26, 27 and 35 relate to increased support for peripheral regions and less favoured regions, and to trade measures; Amendments Nos 17, 48, 49, 50, 55, 56 and 59 relate to reporting arrangements for the COM.
Amendments Nos 3 and 4 are about an increase in EU appropriations for the fruit and vegetable sector.
As I see it, none of these general comments on the COM has any place in the proposal before us, because they anticipate the proposal that we are still considering, and should therefore be discussed in conjunction with this report.
The second group of amendments are specific requests relating to the functioning of the COM, for example Amendment No 5 on new raw manure, and Amendments Nos 27, 21, 25 and 34 on special support measures for severe crises.
Amendment No 18 is intended to improve the scope for direct sales, and Amendments Nos 22 to 24 relate to the operational fund.
Amendments Nos 28 to 30, 33, 36, 37 and 38 concern inter-branch organisations, nuts and withdrawal.
As with the first group of amendment, the proposal we are discussing today is not the right place for these amendments and I cannot therefore accept them.
But I do admit that both groups contain some interesting points which the Commission will carefully consider in relation to the reports to be presented by the year end.
I would like to point out that a proposal to the Council adopted on 5 October already covers consideration of an increase in appropriations for nuts.
The third group of amendments does relate to the proposal actually being debated here.
Amendments Nos 6 and 25 propose an increase in Community support via the operational funds.
The aim of Amendments Nos 31 and 32 is to strike out the reductions in market withdrawal ceilings proposed by the Commission.
Amendments Nos 67 and 68 address water consumption, and Amendments Nos 9, 11, 15, 16, 40, 41, 51, 53, 57, 60 and 61 in various ways propose increases or changes in processing thresholds and aid for tomatoes, peaches, pears, and citrus fruits.
Amendment No 39 proposes simplification of the procedure for adjusting new products in the processing sector.
Amendment No 43 relates to transitional arrangements for tomatoes and Amendment No 12 calls for a study on the abolition of the minimum price.
Lastly, Amendments Nos 62 to 66 provide for direct aids for producers not involved in processing.
Most of the amendments in this group would result in an increase in appropriations which in some cases would be substantial, and are thus very much at odds with the principle of budget neutrality.
I cannot therefore accept these amendments.
Of course the issue of the overall level of Community financing for this sector is also to be discussed by the Council on Monday.
I am sure that these discussions will continue, and that this point will also be an important part of the final decision on this proposal.
In my view, Amendments Nos 41, 53, 67 and 68 would complicate the system rather than simplify it, and the framework system does not cover Amendment No 12.
However, the Commission agrees with the substance of Amendment No 39, but we will consider how to improve the drafting for legal purposes.
Amendments Nos 62 to 66 change the existing system in a way that would jeopardise efforts to develop producer organisations.
In conclusion, I would like to make the following comment. Any delay suffered by the Commission proposal would result in most of the changes due to come into force under this proposal with effect from 1 January 2001 or as from the start of financial year 2001/2002 not coming into effect until a year later.
The Commission regards this as an unnecessary disadvantaging of this sector.
That is why this proposal has been presented at this point, and I hope that Parliament will adopt its opinion this week and that the Council will adopt the proposal before the end of the year.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 10 a.m.
Cod stocks in the Irish Sea
The next item is the report (A5-0276/2000) by Mr Nicholson, on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries, on the proposal for a Council regulation establishing additional technical measures for the recovery of the stock of cod in the Irish Sea (ICES Division VIIa)(COM(2000) 190 - C5-0219/2000 - 2000/0071(CNS)).
Madam President, when I first started to consider drafting this report, I wondered whether it was a wise decision for any politician from Northern Ireland to agree to bring forward a report on Box VIIa in the Irish Sea.
However, I believe that in politics you have to take on board some of the more positive aspects of life.
While this may have been a poisoned chalice initially, I hope that ultimately, I, Parliament and the Commission can together develop something that will be very positive and fruitful for the fishermen who depend on fishing in the Irish Sea.
The report is designed to protect juvenile cod in the Irish Sea.
We have to make it very clear that it is not just designed to protect juvenile cod but also to protect many other species in the Irish Sea.
That is important.
The other species in the Irish Sea will also benefit from this protection.
From that point of view, the one thing that has changed dramatically in recent times is that there is a growing understanding that such protection is necessary.
Perhaps five years ago if you told fishermen in that particular area that there was a need for this, they would have said there was no need for it.
Now there would be a more positive response and a recognition that there is a problem, there has been a problem.
The real question now is how we resolve that problem.
I welcome the cooperation that has existed between the fishermen, their representatives, the Commission and local, regional and national governments, on this particular point.
If we are going to find a way forward, that continued cooperation must exist.
It is positive and has to be built upon.
It must be developed and brought to fruition.
But this cannot be a one-way dialogue.
We cannot have the Commission telling the fishermen that it knows everything.
The Commission must listen to the fishermen, listen to their experience, listen to what they know, take that on board and work and cooperate with them.
This report also requires technical changes: to the mesh size of nets.
It is a very technical report and requires the cooperation of the fishermen with the Commission and regional authorities to ensure that we no longer destroy what was considered a very natural resource in the past.
In Box VIIa in Northern Ireland three ports are totally dependent on the fisheries industry: Kilkeel, Ardglass and Portavogie.
Last year the fishermen in that area had an 11-week closure on their fishing rights.
That was hard.
But in the interests of protecting the juvenile cod and the spawning period, they cooperated and were very positive.
I believe there will also be cooperation next year.
What the fishermen are asking is that the Commission responds to them in a more positive way than it has in the past.
We have to find a way forward.
We have to find a resolution to the situation. That is no easy task way for anyone.
I believe we can find a way through and a positive way forward, but only if everyone cooperates.
I have tried to bring forward amendments which I hope will be helpful.
I hope the Commissioner can be positive in his response.
The technical measures should be reviewed on an annual basis.
That would greatly assist fishermen in that area.
It is not a burden that is easily carried so we require a review every 12 months.
I also hope that the Commissioner can throw a life-line and address the socio-economic hardship associated with the proposals.
Will the Commissioner, if the regional or national governments come forward with a proposal, respond in a positive way and try to find a way forward, to support those fishermen, to improve the technical aspects that need improving, to meet the new standards that have been laid down?
This is a very difficult situation.
It is not an easy one to resolve.
I ask the Commissioner to respond positively.
Madam President, Commissioner, I would like to begin with a variation on a quotation from the poet Heinrich Heine: "If my thoughts at night to fisheries turn, many an hour will I toss and turn".
I might add that if I think about the stock of cod in the Irish Sea, then sleep is truly murdered.
Vigilance is called for, or do you know the reason why cod stocks, which have for years been more depressed to say the least, have been allowed to reach such a historical low?
Is it because of the fish, the fisherman, environmental conditions or society at large?
What is the use of integrated coastal zone management, which we will be discussing shortly, when what structurally weak coastal regions need is a new kind of self-image and above all modern jobs?
However, this can only work if the problems of the origin principle and of recrimination, powers and responsibilities can finally be solved at all levels.
Meaningful, technically verifiable measures need to be introduced.
We need binding sanctions, and we need Member States that exercise their right to check origin, even if doing that hits their pockets.
In addition, three things are needed: political will, fishermen who think like businessmen, and the interaction of consumers and entrepreneurs in the market place.
Each of these three strands needs to be underpinned by the same concept - sustainable management of a valuable and irreplaceable food source.
Those immediately involved are jointly responsible, money alone will not solve any problems in the long term, Mr Nicholson!
Nevertheless, technical measures can help nature to recover when it has got out of balance, and, I hope, can help to restock the Irish Sea with cod.
Unfortunately, our society is inclined to skirt round the law.
And it is quite simple to do that in the middle of the night in the Irish Sea.
I believe that with targeted checks and reporting, and a continuous dialogue between those involved at all levels, we can all once again sleep soundly - including me.
That is why the Committee on Fisheries unanimously supported our feisty colleague James Nicholson.
We hope that this House, the Commission, and the Council will follow suit!
Madam President, rapporteur and Commissioner, this report is a tragic tale about a fish which one author has quoted as literally changing the world in the past thousand years.
The beginning of this new millennium is very different from the beginning of the last.
There has been a fishing spree across the world touching everywhere, the Irish Sea being no exception, and the results are devastating.
The dramatic decline in cod in the Irish Sea is all too apparent.
From 1988 to 1997 the Republic of Ireland's cod catch declined from 5 821 tonnes to 1 492 tonnes.
It takes no mathematician to tell you that conservation is critical if there are to be cod fisheries at all in the Irish Sea.
Before I speak about technical measure, no one has talked about the fish itself.
Did you know that cod will eat anything?
Cod are quite lazy fish.
The whiteness which we all enjoy eating actually is due to sluggishness rather than muscle tone yet the irony is that cod is a dieter's delight.
Cod contains only 0.3% fat and boasts 18% protein, and when dried the protein dramatically increases to 80%.
There is no waste in cod.
The range of culinary delights a cod provides is extensive - and there are books written about this.
This report outlines the technical measures which can be used to preserve juvenile cod.
It deals primarily with mesh sizes and nets.
The rapporteur does mention compensation, but I say this with some caution: compensation is a slippery slope.
It can provide short-term solutions for a longer-term problem.
Sustainable fisheries, where fishermen and their families can survive alongside conservation measures, are mutually beneficial.
That will allow cod stocks time to replenish in order to ensure sustainable fisheries again.
Let us make sure that in this millennium people can enjoy cod from the Irish Sea just as much as they did in the last millennium.
Madam President, I should like to thank Mr Nicholson for the swiftness with which he has submitted his report.
This will enable us to vote tomorrow on a Commission proposal which very much needs to be implemented.
I should like, however, to raise a series of questions that have occurred to me regarding Amendments Nos 1 and 2, which ask that the changes in fishing techniques to be adopted under this proposal should be subsidised under the FIFG.
Although in principle I have nothing against aid to fishermen, I do think it should be granted within a specific framework and in accordance with unequivocal criteria, and this is the basis of my question: to clarify what these criteria are.
The rapporteur invokes Articles 15 and 16 of Regulation (EC) No 2792/1999 in support of his request for aid.
I think in any case that only paragraph 2 of Article 16 should be invoked, and I should therefore like the Commissioner to clarify whether the requests in the report would come under the text of the said article.
If the measures contained in this proposal can be financed under Article 16(2) of the FIFG, this would mean that any technical measure involving a major restriction in fishing activity could be too.
It must be remembered that by definition any technical measure involves some restriction on the activity.
I think it is worth making this point clear, because it is obvious that any technical measure means an economic loss for fishermen, either directly or indirectly.
If this is the criterion that must be followed, it is also clear that if measures such as those proposed are subsidised, then subsidies will also have to be given to any others deriving from a modification of technical measures which would result in changes in the use of fishing techniques or methods, in other words virtually all the reforms under the technical measures regulation.
Commissioner, I should really like you to clarify this point, seeing that Article 16(2) is open to all kinds of interpretations.
I should like to know what interpretation the Commission gives to Article 16(2).
Thank you, Madam President, and I forgo one minute of my time this evening, which is getting rather long for everyone.
Madam President, I congratulate Mr Nicholson on his excellent report.
He pointed out that in order to be effective such measures require the support of fishermen and scientists who live and work in an area.
This may well prove to be a vital trail-blazer for the strategy of devolved management of fisheries which all of us have been discussing in the context of the reform of the CFP.
It has become increasingly evident that fishermen and scientists working in a specific fishery will more readily adhere to rules and regulations that they themselves have conceived, rather than Brussels hand-me-downs.
The major fisheries organisations in the UK - the Scottish Fishermen's Federation and the National Federation of Fishermen's Organisations - which, between them represent the interests of 1900 vessels, both support the concept of zonal management.
Fishermen are also deeply concerned that such rules and regulations may be interpreted and applied differently by fishing vessels from different Member States.
That is why again, zonal fisheries management which involves all fishermen working in a common fishery will ensure that the rules are applied fairly and squarely across the board.
This report is timely, as cod stocks are not only diminishing rapidly in the Irish Sea but are in spiral decline around all the waters of the United Kingdom.
Some years ago when the House of Commons in London drew up an agreement which effectively ended the cod war between the UK and Iceland, it was famously referred to as "the piece of cod which passeth all understanding".
Hopefully this report will mark the beginning of the recovery of cod stocks in the Irish Sea and will pave the way to the future.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, I would first like to offer my heartfelt thanks to Mr Nicholson for his excellent report.
At the same time, I would like to reassure him that I am perfectly willing to listen to fishermen, especially as I shall be in Ireland the week after next and will be fostering close contacts and entering into discussions with the fishermen there, and with the entire sector.
You are already very familiar with this proposal, so I believe I do not need to present it again here.
I will therefore move straight on to the amendments tabled and I unfortunately have to say that I have some problems with them.
There are two reasons why the Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 3 and 4, which relate to compensatory aid.
First, this document is about technical measures, and a document on technical measures is not the right place for provisions on compensatory aid.
Second, and even more importantly, there are Member States who have to decide under Regulation 27/97 whether they will offer fishermen compensatory aid for temporarily withdrawing from fishing activity or not.
The other two amendments, Amendments Nos 1 and 2, address a future review of the regulation and the Commission finds them difficult for the following reasons: first, the fact that everyone - the Commission, Member States' administrations and also fishermen themselves - want the regulation to come into force on 1 January 2001.
In my opinion, any delay in this entry into force is to be avoided.
Second, this regulation was drafted on the basis of the outcome of meetings with fishermen, scientific experts and administrators, and we intend to continue with these meetings for as long as the cod crisis continues.
This could well lead to a review of the measures and conditions to be put in place now.
So I ask you to trust us.
We will observe the review conditions in practice.
I cannot accept this amendment if the regulation is to come into force as quickly as possible.
I hope you will understand this.
Madam President, I listened with great interest to the Commissioner.
Maybe he could tell me when he is going to visit either the port of Kilkeel, Ardglass or Portavogie. Could he respond to that?
He said he is going to visit the fishermen.
I would love to be there with him.
I would love to accompany him and speak to the fishermen alongside him.
Can he tell me when he is going to visit those ports?
Madam President, I mentioned that I am going to Ireland - and I am also visiting Scotland, by the way - and I have left it to the governments and the various authorities there to put together my programme and also to decide which fishermen I should meet there.
So I cannot change that at the moment, but you are more than welcome to accompany me if you wish, Mr Nicholson.
Madam President, I do not want to prolong this but I have a horrible suspicion that the Commissioner is not going to come to Northern Ireland but perhaps to another part of the island of "Ireland" that has nothing to do with Northern Ireland.
Northern Ireland is part of the United Kingdom.
If he wants to come to Northern Ireland to visit fishermen I would be happy to go with him.
But please do not give me the type of platonic responses you have just given.
I will not accept that.
If you want to defend that to the fishermen you can do so, but I will not be part of it.
Please do not in any way get involved in that type of situation.
Fishing is something on which we all cooperate, in both the north and south of the island.
Do not try to make it a political point of view.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 10 a.m.
Unbundled access to local loop
The next item is the report (A5-0298/2000) by Mr Clegg, on behalf of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on unbundled access to the local loop [COM(2000) 394 - C5-0432/2000 - 2000/0185(COD)].
Mr President, colleagues, it is always a pleasure to be debating with each other in such cosy circumstances late at night.
I certainly did not know when I took on the rapporteurship of something as obscure as local loop unbundling that it would be quite so controversial and so complicated as it has proved nor that our discussions would culminate in such nocturnal circumstances.
The local loop unbundling regulation is an important piece of legislation which completes unfinished business from the past but also represents an important step forward into the future.
It completes unfinished business in the past because it is enforcing competition in the final segment of the telecommunications world which until now had escaped earlier liberalising European measures.
At the same time, by ensuring that access to the local loop - the last mile of so-called copper wire - is now open to all new market entrants and is not the exclusive province of the so-called incumbent operators, the regulation will act as a significant boost for increased choice of non-voice services for consumers.
It should lower prices for consumers and act as a boost to the take-up of new fancy broadband services and so point Europe very firmly in a dynamic, forward-looking direction.
As such, it will help fulfil the promise made in Lisbon in March of this year when a number of ambitious targets were set, which, it is said, will help ensure that the gap that has opened between the European Union and the United States in the information economy is closed as soon as possible.
The procedure we had to follow, in order to act as quickly as possible upon the conclusions of the Lisbon Summit and the proposal of the Commission in July, has been unusual.
I am told that if we vote on the report tomorrow and adopt our report as voted in the committee it will be the fastest piece of legislation of this type ever processed by the European Union institutions.
This has only been possible because of an unprecedented degree of cooperation.
Firstly, cooperation with the Commission - and I would like to thank Commissioner Liikanen and all his extremely good officials who have been working on this for their assiduous help throughout the process.
They really have provided us all with an invaluable service.
I would also like to thank the Council for their cooperation, firstly driven by the mandate in the conclusions in the Lisbon summit but also by a particularly effective series of French Presidency initiatives in the Council of Ministers and last and by no means least I would like to express thanks for cooperation within this House.
I have had the privilege and the benefit of working with a number of colleagues of all groups who have pulled together in the committee to produce the report which we will be voting on tomorrow.
I would like to thank all of them for the great cooperation which they have extended to me.
It has not been easy: firstly, because the procedure is difficult, it is new.
Those of us who have worked on it all agree that if this sets a precedent for the future, we could perhaps consider promulgating some rules which will facilitate this kind of process in the future but also some rules on substance.
This is a measure which is clearly going to prove to be painful to some of the incumbent operators involved and I understand that a number of colleagues have been in discussions with incumbent operators and I am very grateful to them for conveying their concerns to me and also working with me to find an appropriate way forward.
We can be proud of the work that we have completed and that I hope we will complete by our vote tomorrow.
It shows that, even in difficult and controversial areas of policy such as this, this House is able to act decisively and clearly when it needs to and for that I would once again like to extend my thanks to all concerned.
Mr President, firstly I would like to express my thanks to the rapporteur.
He has done some excellent work as part of this difficult process, and, taking into account the problems created by this 'fast-track' procedure both for the timetables for the legislative work and parliamentary debate, we should be very satisfied now with the compromise that has been reached.
What is important for consumers is that the regulation should enter into force immediately from the start of the year.
The matter is very urgent, as free price competition in local networks is one of the cornerstones of Europe and, more generally the development of the European information society.
I am particularly satisfied that Parliament, the Council and the Commission were able to work in such close cooperation in this matter and that they treated this complex issue, discussing it constructively, in an atmosphere of understanding that was perhaps unprecedented.
As Parliament hopefully tomorrow will adopt the report, as I sincerely believe and hope it will, in the spirit of consensus achieved, the ball will then be in the Council' s court.
Free competition in local calls will benefit users of the Internet in particular.
The telecommunications monopolies have been charging exorbitant sums of money until now.
The European consumer has, in the worst cases, had to pay ten times more to connect to the Internet than the Americans.
Reduced charges will lower the threshold at which people can start to use the Internet in their everyday tasks.
For example, the limitless possibilities of e-commerce will be within easier reach for Europeans.
Lowering local call charges will benefit everyone, including those who are not excited about byte-inspired adventures and the Internet.
National watchdog agencies have an enormous responsibility to see that the telephone companies that enjoy monopoly status really do open the end of the last copper wire to the new companies in the industry.
It is to be anticipated that some monopolies will try every trick in the book to cling on to their competitive edge.
This will have to be dealt with severely.
The monopolies will have to be prepared to pay substantial sums in compensation if they delay opening up their networks.
Only in this way may we ensure that there is free competition immediately at the start of next year.
On behalf of my group, I hope that tomorrow' s vote has a positive outcome and then the ball really will be in the Council' s court, and we shall be able to apply the new regulations within the framework of new legislation at the beginning of the new year.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, my thanks go to Mr Clegg for his excellent work.
He has had a rather extraordinary time of it recently, but, despite all that, I must thank him.
For the Commission this is an important and very successful achievement, it must be said.
We have now a record in a field in which developments come so fast that records befit it rather well.
Opening up local networks to competition is a "fast-track" opportunity afforded by the Treaty of Amsterdam, which we are now taking full advantage of, as, otherwise, every day we will be losing money in the shape of exorbitant charges and creating barriers to the process.
In just a few weeks we in the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy have dealt with this issue and have, under the leadership of the rapporteur, succeeded in negotiating this proposal with the Commission and the Council, a proposal that must surely be adopted tomorrow without amendment.
This is my firm belief.
We have in practice thus discussed the issue simultaneously with the Commission and the Council, as well as amongst ourselves and with many other parties, and now we have achieved this result, which is nothing to be ashamed about.
Local networks have, I would say, been the greatest bottleneck in the European telecommunications market and now it is being removed, and if it is not, then the national authorities can intervene, and if the prices are not right we then have recourse for compensation.
Consumers and enterprises have lost millions and millions as a result of too high charges.
Now charges for telephone calls, fast Internet connections and multimedia services will come down throughout Europe.
This is just the right measure as far as consumers are concerned, and it will help us too.
The networks have to open up with terms and conditions that are fair and non-discriminatory.
That is very important.
On the other hand, in the parliamentary amendments we have given consideration to the fact that the owners of the network and those who built it should not go penniless: they must receive a fair income for their work and, furthermore, their future investment in the network must be made possible for the future organisation of the infrastructure.
The problem here of course is that privacy will suffer, as now anybody with the permission to do so can install their own equipment at exchanges and switchboards.
Thus, the traditional secrecy of the sound telephone is now truly crumbling.
The auction of radio frequencies, however, is promoting developments in the opposite direction.
It is pushing up charges to the consumer and has led to something like chaos in the market.
This is pushing up charges, as I said, and what is going to happen on the fourth and fifth generation mobile front?
States are losing their ability to control matters.
Already things are moving in such a way that an oligopolistic situation is developing, which will result in the market being carved up directly.
It was the case in Holland, and just recently in Italy, that the number of players taking part in auctions was only equivalent to the number of licences available.
This is therefore a matter of a sort of private agreement, which means that the market can no longer function properly.
I propose that the Commission should give an account now, while there is so much data on this, of what all this means.
This is development in the opposite direction to what we have achieved in connection with this regulation.
Madam President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, in the opinion of the Communist Party of Greece, telecommunications are a sector of strategic importance and, as such, should be driven not by the quest for profit but by the desire to provide a better universal service.
As part of the European Union's general policy of opening the doors of every sector of social activity to big business, the regulation which we are examining today gives the monopolies what is perhaps the most important chunk of the telecommunications network.
This infrastructure, which has taken a long time and a great deal of public money to develop, is being offered for a mess of potage, with the telecommunications organisations receiving no more than maintenance and operating costs in exchange.
The argument that this will allow new services to develop does not stand up, given that these services can be developed by the telecommunications organisations equally well and, without the strain of having to make huge profits, certainly more cheaply.
The European Commission and the Council are not content with simply handing local loops to the private sector; oh no, they have to do it, and with what haste, in the form of a regulation which will apply immediately.
I believe that we can draw useful conclusions from this example as to whose interests the European Union is actually serving.
At the outset I would like to pay tribute to Mr Clegg who has worked extremely hard over the last few of weeks with a view to ensuring that the final report was well-balanced and reflected the concerns of the difficulties of the various political groups within the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy.
I am satisfied that the text voted by the committee takes into account two issues which were of particular concern to me.
The first one was fair pricing and the second was the provision of a universal service in the context of the further opening of the communications market to competition.
I believe it is important to ensure that the changes take place in a controlled way, to allow all players involved the time to adjust and to guarantee the rights of all consumers.
It is clear that we must all support the upgrading of existing telecommunications infrastructures so that we can take advantage of evolving new technologies.
In my country we are determined that our telecommunications infrastructure be of the highest standard in order to secure new investment into the country.
Investment in our infrastructure is a critical component to the continued success and growth of the Irish economy; in particular, Ireland is aiming to become a world centre of e-commerce.
At the same time it is essential that all citizens be guaranteed the same benefits from the upgrading of telecommunications infrastructures.
The opening-up of the local copper networks to provide competition must lead to all local networks being upgraded in all towns and indeed in all villages.
We must avoid cherry-picking by new entrants who might wish to upgrade only networks in the bigger urban areas.
On the question of fair price, the price charge for access to the local loop must be allowed to reflect sunken costs in addition to a margin for reinvestment.
In this respect I am glad to see that the Commission supports the historical cost formula for pricing.
We must guarantee that existing telecommunications operators can secure adequate financial compensation for opening these local loops.
I believe that the national regulatory authority should be able to play a fair and mediating role between existing operators and new networks.
In conclusion, I believe that it is a fair and well-balanced text.
I should like to thank Mr Clegg for being prepared to listen to so many of his colleagues.
Madam President, Commissioner, the Lisbon extraordinary European Council set a basic strategic objective for the European Union: that of becoming 'the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world'.
For this statement to become reality, it must be followed by measures to liberalise the markets, promote competition and thereby open up access for new suppliers of telecommunications services and in particular Internet services.
In my opinion, the Commission and the European authorities have always been consistent with the Lisbon declarations: I refer, for example, to the proposal for a directive on e-commerce which, with the objective or the excuse of removing a form of discrimination against European producers who distribute information services will, in the end, be penalising the development of e-commerce throughout the whole of Europe.
This is a matter on which we are, however, moving swiftly and, it would appear, genuinely in the right direction.
Our rapporteur, Mr Clegg, has done a good job, making the Commission's proposal clearer and more specific and setting out the necessary conditions for that rapid conclusion of the legislative process which so many of us hope for and for which we too will vote tomorrow.
I would, however, like to take this opportunity to warn the Commission that, once this regulation has been adopted, other obstacles will have to be tackled if the 'last mile' of the telecommunications sector is to be genuinely liberalised as well.
In my country, Italy, the conditions for the liberalisation of the last mile have existed for a long time, but the national telecommunications authority has delayed practical implementation, in particular with regard to fixing price charges for access to the local loop.
In the case of Italy, but also other European countries, this is probably due to the powerful position of the incumbent operator, which is trying to put off the move for as long as possible.
There are parties who have much to lose and, in Italy, there is a conflict of interests between the State as regulator and the State as owner or controller of some of the main telecommunications services companies.
Madam President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, as the previous speakers have already said, we are entering new territory with the Regulation on unbundled access to the local loop.
The accelerated procedure provided for in the Treaty of Amsterdam is being used for the first time, that is, there is no second reading.
The aim of this is to approve the Regulation on unbundled access quickly, so that local telecommunications markets can be opened up to competition by the end of the year.
Our initial experience with this procedure suggests that it is only suitable in very exceptional cases, but that it is possible with important subjects like unbundled access to take legislative decisions with all due speed here in this House.
I am of course particularly pleased about this. Without Nicholas Clegg and all his commitment it would not have been possible to consider the regulation so swiftly in committee and here in the plenary and, I hope, to approve it tomorrow.
He has been able to reconcile varying positions and to present Parliament's views to the Council.
My dear Nick, I would like to take this opportunity to thank you again very sincerely for your splendid work!
Why do we need the regulation?
Despite the complete liberalisation of the European telecommunications market since 1998, the "last mile", that is the subscriber's link to the network, is at present still in the hands of the "incumbent" telecommunications company.
The regulation is intended to provide for competition in this "last mile".
Only by ensuring that there is true competition in this market segment can we guarantee rapid and low-cost access to the Internet and to multimedia applications in the long term.
This is not only the dream of every Internet user, it is also an urgent necessity in the era of the new economy.
The reality in large parts of Europe is at present very different, so that dialling into the net is expensive, telephone lines are engaged while surfing the Internet, surfing is costly, and there are long waiting times.
According to the latest studies, at the beginning of 2000 only 400 000 Europeans had access to broadband services, compared with 3 million in the USA.
The European Commission has therefore rightly decided to lend a hand here - and quickly.
In my opinion there is no other alternative politically speaking but to approve the regulation in its present form and thus remove the final bottleneck.
Madam President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, many thanks to Nicholas Clegg also for his hard work.
To give one light-hearted example, his compromise proposals reached me when I was on the way home on the motorway.
Of course I pulled over, in accordance with the law, and then discussed them further with him.
This shows how we worked on this and I think that this was superb.
We are also willing to do this again in future, but we could do with a bit more time now and again to discuss particular points in still greater depth.
Our political objective was to enhance competition and so smooth the path to the information society.
This regulation is intended to achieve a marked improvement in competition in the local access network, with the aim, for example, of giving Internet services better access to the mass market, so that market penetration will increase.
This initiative will ultimately also help to promote the information society.
But quicker and cheaper Internet access without content is worthless.
Above all, the information society must mean investment in people and their skills.
One important point is that the regulation regulates in the spirit of the original telecommunications liberalisation, that is in an asymmetrical way.
This has certainly demonstrated its value when it comes to improving competition.
But this regulation will be superseded in future and we will move on to a new regulatory framework under competition law.In view of that, I would say that Amendment No 13 is particularly important, as it provides for a new Recital 10(a) which emphasises once again that a new regulatory framework will replace this regulation in the not too distant future.
Of at least equal importance is the fact that the Council is not holding up the telecommunications regulatory package.
I also trust that the Council will adopt it soon and that we will continue the consultation procedure on the rest of the package quickly and in a serious manner.
I hope that the Council will not leave us in the lurch should one or other Member State perhaps still have reservations.
Our work should set an example here.
We have reached agreement quickly and effectively, and I hope that the Council will follow suit.
Mr Clegg said in his speech that this was a controversial and complicated piece of work and I think therefore we chose well to appoint him as a rapporteur.
He has been very unflappable throughout and, on behalf of the House, I would like to record that at the time he was successfully decoupling the local loop, he was also making a very successful coupling of his own, by getting married.
I am sure that we all pass on our congratulations to him.
It will not surprise this House to know that, as a representative of the British Conservative Party - and it was the Conservative Government that privatised British Telecom over 17 years ago, probably the first of the large-scale telecom privatisations in Europe - I very much welcome this essential further action to deregulate and open up the market.
In pushing this forward it has been very important for the Commission to lay the foundations with the telecoms package that we are now considering and we very much admire their ambition and their zeal to do this.
My only comment, when looking at the slightly loose wording on some of the timing - for example, that notified operators shall from 31 December meet reasonable requests from beneficiaries - is to ask the Commissioner to assure us that he will be very severe in monitoring this, because there is no point in pushing this text through here if we have very slack and loose implementation in the Member States where this also needs to be pushed through.
Can I also say this that this has been an admirable initiative resulting from the Lisbon summit but a lot of other key aspects concerning moving forward in the new economy were mentioned in Lisbon?
Who is going to use all this new low-cost deregulated capacity?
We want to see the new entrepreneurs, the new Internet companies coming into the market.
I remind the Commissioner that one of the other key aspects of Lisbon was the creation of new conditions in the European economy, to get the new investors.
Can I encourage him with the new spirit of adventure that we see here - and perhaps that is not a word that we always associate with the Commission - to move forward with zeal and vigour to achieve these other aspects of Lisbon with the same effectiveness.
Can I start by congratulating Mr Clegg on the speed and quality of his work and also welcoming him to this rather exclusive band of Members who so often are here late at night debating telecommunications issues.
Indeed Commissioner Liikanen's predecessor, Commissioner Bangemann described us once as 'we few, we happy few, we band of brothers'.
He rather ignored the sisters but I think you get the drift from his Shakespearian quote.
I should also like to comment on the legal instrument - the regulation - because it is exceptional and historic and there are very special reasons: reasons of speed - post-Lisbon summit - and reasons of technical consistency which I think we all appreciate and understand.
Parliament must be ready to look at new ways of working, imaginative and, as Mr Harbour says, adventurous.
But we also must make it clear when such measures are appropriate and it is almost certain that the other parts of this latest telecommunications package are going to take rather longer and will be along more traditional lines.
I want to comment too on one very important part of Mr Clegg's proposal which relates to the powers of national regulators and powers of initiative, which I think are very important components in the speedy and consistent enforcement and implementation of this regulation.
Others have mentioned the Lisbon summit and it is of course right to stress that this legislation follows a commitment from the European Union Member States to support the growth and use of the Internet in Europe under the e-Europe action plan.
Much of this would not happen without this promise to provide affordable, high-speed Internet access and we note the importance of unbundling in the success of the e-Europe plan.
It is also true that the combined efforts of the Commission, Parliament and the Council have brought about this legislation as part of an overall effort to modernise telecommunications law.
This effort will bring openness, transparency and competition to the industry while balancing the need for regulation with the desire for liberalisation.
We have more legislation ahead of us and we have to learn the lessons from so much of the legislation with which we have been jointly involved over many years in the past.
Then we tried to look backwards, to extrapolate from what we had done, before looking forwards and guessing, second-guessing or third-guessing what lay ahead of us.
We made mistakes in such a fast-moving and volatile market but I would like to end with the point that if Europe is to stay competitive, to stay in this field, to bring the very real benefits of e-Europe to all the citizens of the European Union, to remain ahead in third-generation mobiles - if I can jump ahead - vis-à-vis the United States of America, it is going to need all our combined efforts to make sure that the total package is safely accomplished.
Madam President, unbundling access to the local loop is intended to open up the level of competition, providing lower prices for the customer and easier, cheaper access to the Internet, fostering technological innovation in the local access area.
I welcome these promised developments.
But as the rapporteur mentioned, many of us have been made aware of the concerns of the local telecommunications provider.
The Irish telecommunications provider, Eirecom, maintains that it should be allowed a reasonable time period to implement the changes and that the 31 December deadline is practically unachievable.
Also, charging for unbundled access to the local loop should be fair and adequate to ensure the long-term development and upgrading of the local access infrastructure.
If it is not financially viable to invest in less populated and less developed areas, it is unlikely to be attractive to new operators.
When we combine this possible scenario with other measures that adversely affect rural areas, such as the liberalisation of the postal service, which threatens the survival of small rural post offices, and the recent closure of many small rural banks, how will the possible reduction of investment in long-term development and upgrade of local access infrastructure affect already disadvantaged rural regions?
It is my sincere hope that none of these concerns becomes reality and that in future we avoid the risk of seriously limiting discussion in Parliament by speeding up procedures on issues that will ultimately have the greatest effect on the most vulnerable.
Commissioner, Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, behind the somewhat barbaric name of the proposal for a regulation which we are debating this evening, unbundling access to the local loop, an expression moreover which is totally impenetrable for the average citizen, there lies a simple yet serious decision regarding the liberalisation of the local network of voice telephony and data transmission services.
As we have heard this evening, for some in this House, the closing of the final chapter of a public monopoly can only lead to an automatic reduction in the costs of local communications and this can therefore only be positive for consumers.
For others, including me, this is far from being quite so obvious and, above all, quite so automatic.
If unregulated competition always leads to a permanent reduction in prices, and always benefits each and every consumer everywhere, this would have happened long ago.
Moreover, the example of mobile telephony, which is completely open to competition, proves precisely the opposite.
Real prices of calls from mobiles continue to be high and the transparency of costs and prices is far from being guaranteed.
Between the hype and the reality there is not a divide but a chasm.
Many citizens have fallen victim to this and are unable to pay their bill, and resort to declaring their mobile stolen.
Nevertheless, I approve of unbundling, but simple, clear constraints need to be worked out in this area as well in order to define the limits, follow progress and lay down terms for the financing of the universal service.
Our rapporteur and colleague, Mr Nicholas Clegg, has certainly done a lot of work, and I congratulate him on that.
He has even been open to the arguments of his colleagues, and I thank him for that.
But he is very liberal and so he has naturally rejected anything that could lead to a genuine universal service.
He is more afraid of public monopolies than private monopolies.
I hope, therefore, that the framework directive entitled 'A Universal Service' , for which I was appointed rapporteur in July of last year on behalf of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, and which I now have to salvage despite the attempts of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, will enable us to redress the balance to some extent.
Mr Clegg has correctly and very seriously set forth the Commission's proposal on unbundling from a technical standpoint.
But I am sorry to say that, as I see it, he has not adequately responded to the longer term risk posed for the weaker and the more susceptible players in a deregulated system, and to the risk posed by private monopolies.
This evening, I repeat once again that, for me, a public service must not be a sink for the market.
It must be, and it can be, an objective in itself and, for us Europeans, a value and an asset for balanced and sustainable development.
All things considered, Madam President, as the three European institutions are in agreement on uncoupling, I will not be more catholic than the Pope, and I shall therefore be voting in favour tomorrow.
Madam President, Commissioner, I have before me the documents we will be voting on this week.
I think that the most important report is the Clegg report, which has quite simply demonstrated that decisions can be made swiftly and unconventionally.
I think that this should serve as a model for us in the European legislative process, so that new developments can be responded to quickly, simply and unbureaucratically with the right decisions.
I would like to congratulate Mr Clegg on having managed to reconcile so many different interests.
And I would also like to thank the Commission for complying so efficiently and competently with the Council's request to use the accelerated procedure in this case.
I believe that we really are taking genuinely forward-looking steps as far as the European public is concerned.
The public in Europe will feel, in their wallets, in the quality of services and also on the labour market, that these measures have made Europe more internationally competitive.
We know that UMTS will provide us with a new service.
The environment and telecommunications will in future play a very special role in international competitiveness.
That is why I think it is important to create a level playing field.
This directive in particular demonstrates that we have been very thorough in aiming for fairness, and this has been a model of how to legislate, with a review, with a proper and thorough examination, with all stakeholders being consulted, and, lastly, a good, efficient, swift and precise procedure in the European Parliament.
Once again, I would like to express my very sincere thanks!
Madam President, it falls to me to be the one who cries wolf on this occasion.
I do not normally take a position in this House which is based purely on national considerations but it seems to me that we are attempting to put in place a regulation which is inflexible and does not take into account the position of the market in Ireland.
The proposal that we have will oblige Eirecom, a private limited company, a former state monopoly, to open up its local loop to alternative providers and will not oblige alternative providers already in the market place such as cable TV, satellite and wireless local loop operators to do the same.
They are excluded from the scope of this regulation.
Cable TV companies in Ireland already possess the network and are already gearing up their network to provide telephony, Internet and other interactive services.
In many cases they operate large and exclusive franchise areas.
In the case of Ireland, penetration rates by these companies in the larger cities and towns is of the order of 90%, far exceeding those of Eirecom PLC.
It is impossible to understand and entirely unacceptable that the proposal does not also encompass these TV cable companies.
In addition, fixed network operators such as Eirecom will find it impossible to compete with these companies which are providing bundled services to customers, which often include Internet access and free local calls as part of their standard bundle of service offerings.
Clearly where an alternative competing network coexists with a copper network, either all should be unbundled or none.
This will be consistent with the stated justification for unbundling put forward by the Commission.
The regulation on unbundled access to local loop is by its very nature inherently flawed.
I do believe that worst law is in most cases bad law, and this is the case in relation to this regulation.
The night sessions are not always the greatest pleasure in the European Parliament but tonight, I must say, it has been an extremely pleasant and positive debate.
I share the view of those who consider this issue to be historic.
It is historic in two ways.
First of all, we will now complete the long march towards liberalisation of telecommunications.
This also serves the interests of universal service.
When we increase competition in the networks it will cut prices, improve quality and make the services more affordable.
It will help to create an inclusive information society.
Secondly, it is historic in the sense that we have replied to a question which is often asked: Is Europe too slow to act?
Are we able to seize the opportunity of information technology?
There is a lot of suspicion around.
Can Community institutions ever make it?
If Parliament were to accept tomorrow the Clegg report we would show that we can.
We can show that we are able to act in Internet time.
We will have concrete proof, which would increase enormously the credibility of the European Union, especially in the eyes of the younger generation which lives in this age of the Internet.
None of this would not be possible without excellent cooperation between the institutions.
I should like to thank the rapporteur, Mr Clegg, for the excellent work he has done, and also the whole committee.
It would have not have been possible without profound knowledge of the issue.
Neither would it have been possible without a strong will to negotiate, with many partners.
I also thank the Council presidency, which has been very firm and very determined to drive this issue through.
In many Member States it has been a very sensitive and complicated matter.
Mr Gallagher and Mr Haarder raised a few issues in this context.
It really is a key part of the e-Europe action plan to liberalise the telecommunications market to make the prices cheap and the quality of service higher.
At the same time we must remember that this is one side of the coin.
On the other side, we need people with skills and qualifications who can use these services.
So we must continue to invest in the education of all people, young and old alike.
Insofar as the implementation of this regulation is concerned, yesterday the national regulators had a meeting with Commission officials.
They agreed to try to accelerate the implementation on this regulation and to do it in as harmonised a way as possible, so as to have a strong European market in this sector.
The Commission can also welcome practically everything in the report.
The report is supportive of the objectives and draft measures included in the Commission proposal.
I should just like to mention three of those.
First, the aim is to mandate operators not defined as having significant market power in the provision of fixed telephony networks to provide unbundled access to the metallic local loop from 31 December 2000 under transparent, non-discriminatory and cost-oriented conditions.
Secondly, to ensure transparency by other operators we will have to publish a reference offer for the access conditions to the local loop and associated facilities such as co-location, including pricing, under the scrutiny of the national regulatory authority in order to ensure fairness.
Here I am happy to note that the national regulatory authorities want to cooperate to make this effective everywhere.
Finally, the regulations to unbundle the local loop will allow new entrants all types of access modalities where technically feasible, full unbundling and shared access to global loops and sub-loops.
This maximises technical innovation, greater competition and choice for users.
The Commission accepts in full all 18 amendments to the Clegg report.
They improve the Commission's proposal, providing for more accurate technical definitions and more specific requirements of the national players and national regulatory authorities.
These amendments are constructive and will ensure that the regulation is fully operational.
Thus they guarantee that unbundling is rapidly and effectively implemented from 31 December 2000.
The Commission also hopes that the Council will approve the text as amended in the report and hopefully accepted by Parliament tomorrow.
Then the Council would be able to complete the codecision policy in one reading.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 10 a.m.
(The sitting was closed at 11.40 p.m.)
Statement by the President
Madam President, my intervention refers to the situation in the Ivory Coast.
This week there is no debate on topical and urgent subjects.
Yesterday it was the turn of the people of the Ivory Coast, after Serbia, to set an example of commitment and the fight for democracy by opposing a military coup d' état and rigged elections.
I believe you should send Mr Laurent Gbagbo, the winner of the elections, a message of solidarity and support from the European Parliament.
I shall be very happy to do so, Mr Barón Crespo.
Vote
Draft amendments to Sections I, II, IV, V, VI, VII and VIII of the draft general budget for 2001 concerning the European Parliament, the Council, the Court of Justice, the Court of Auditors, the Economic and Social Committee, the Committee of the Regions, and the Ombudsman.
Before the vote:
(The Greens opened yellow umbrellas with the words "Climate Change" on them) President.
That yellow goes very nicely with our blue seats but, even so, I invite you to furl your umbrellas, so that the vote on the budget can proceed with the dignity befitting this Parliament.
Wynn (PSE), chairman of the Committee on Budgets.
Madam President, as you said earlier, this will be a long process.
Normally we like to streamline the budget votes so that we can get through them in as quick a time as possible.
However, we have a lot of amendments on this occasion.
Whilst I respect people's democratic right to table amendments, can I just warn Members of this House that if some of the amendments which are not in the general framework agreement between the groups are voted, then we will begin to exceed ceilings and we will have to stop the vote.
We have no margins in virtually all the categories.
If this vote does not go as we had planned, then just be aware that I may be standing up, or Mrs Haug may be standing up, to say we have to stop the vote.
We can then assess what we can vote on.
I would like to make two pleas.
One is to our colleagues in the Committee on Agriculture who have tabled over 30 amendments.
The amending letter will be coming forward before second reading and that is when we will take final decisions on agricultural issues.
If I could ask them to withdraw those amendments it would save a lot of time.
I would also ask Mr Heaton-Harris and his colleagues if they could withdraw their 33 amendments.
Once again that will save us a tremendous amount of time.
I must say the 33 amendments are far better than the 393 that were tabled by Mr Heaton-Harris and his colleagues in committee.
So we have to be grateful there are only 33, but I would welcome it if he would withdraw them.
It would speed this process up considerably.
Madam President, following Mr Wynn's observation about the number of amendments my committee might or might not have tabled, it is fair to point out that this is part of the democratic process and if we are not here to question and raise points, then what are we here for?
Madam President, I would point out though that we still have not received an answer to one question, namely whether the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development is prepared to withdraw its amendments.
I would be very interested in this, because it is by far our most serious problem.
You see, if we accept one single amendment - you know this, fellow delegates know it, I have said it more than once - then we will, as it were, already be in breach of the Interinstitutional Agreement, because we will then have gone over the margin for payments.
Would you perhaps like to repeat the question to someone from the Committee on Agriculture?
Madam President, I understand the rapporteur's objections, but the vote on the amendments tabled by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development will not only be about money but also about a particular political line.
The amendments go some way towards making it clear what the Agriculture Committee wants, and unfortunately we do not see ourselves in a position to withdraw them; instead, we will put them to the vote and we will see what the House makes of them.
We in the Agriculture Committee believe that the views which they express are sensible and we cannot therefore withdraw the amendments.
I hope that I am also speaking here on behalf of the other coordinators.
The reply is clear.
Mrs Haug, I believe you want to present some compromise proposals.
Madam President, as we do every year and in every budgetary procedure, we will of course have to start by voting on a few additional technical adjustments.
Last-minute negotiations have been held with all the groups and, in my capacity as rapporteur, I should like to table a number of technical corrections on five points.
The first concerns line B3-300 on information measures.
Here the groups have agreed to place 50% against the budget line and to leave 50% in the reserve, and not to put the total amount in the reserve as previously decided.
The same applies to line B3-306 for the PRINCE information campaign.
There too we should now like to place 50% against the budget line and 50% in the reserve.
Where line B5-312 - for the Medicines Agency in London - is concerned, we should now like to pay an additional 1.3 million because we have noted that the Agency now has a heavier workload because of orphan drugs.
So, we have an additional 1.3 million for the Medicines Agency.
The fourth line concerns the performance reserve.
When we decided on the performance reserve in the Budgets Committee we made a technical correction, deleting two lines in this reserve which no longer contained any amounts at all, just p.m. entries.
These are lines B7-5211 and B7-547.
They concern cooperation with the Baltic region and the civil administration in the Balkans.
The final line in this compromise package for the groups is A-3027.
This relates to the International Centre for European Training.
Here it is intended to place the total amount against the line - so there are no longer any reserves - and at the same time, the appropriations are to be increased by EUR 300 000 to 1.8 million.
These are the technical changes.
They have been agreed with the groups, and I would ask you to make the necessary adjustments before the vote on the budget so that we can go into the vote with the package agreed.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, the administrative budgets are rather less complicated in this respect, but here too we may need to make a technical adjustment, depending on what the House decides today.
I should like to ask you also to support our making the necessary adjustments to budget line A-206, Acquisition of immovable property, depending on which amendments are adopted, so that we do not exceed our self-imposed ceiling of 20% of total administrative expenditure.
I believe that this is customary in the House and I would be grateful if you could support this proposal.
I have received a motion for outright rejection of the general budget for 2001 tabled by Mr Wurtz.
Madam President, we already know the result of the coming vote, but we wanted to put down a marker.
The basic problem our resolution addresses is going to remain with us throughout the budgetary procedure and beyond.
So, if our fears are confirmed, and whatever the vote today, I just hope all Members who share our ambitions for Europe will join us in the fray.
I shall put the motion for outright rejection of the draft general budget to the vote.
I would remind you that a qualified majority is required.
(Parliament rejected the motion) - Before the vote on draft Amendment No 19
Madam President, we voted in block 1.
The vote concerns an amendment tabled by the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party to increase the tobacco subsidy by EUR 5 million.
Yet, I have noticed that proposals have also been moved here to reduce the budget.
I fail to see the connection between the two, and furthermore, it escapes me completely that in block 1, this increase was proposed by the Liberals, and that under Amendments Nos 6, 4 and 9, a number of the Members of the same Liberal Group subsequently proposed scrapping the budget altogether.
Either this is a way of pursuing Liberal politics, where the left hand does not know what the right hand is doing, or there is a lack of coordination.
Surely we cannot vote in favour of an increase one moment and vote in favour of a reduction the next.
If I am being honest, I feel we are to some extent deceiving the electorate.
Those comments are no longer appropriate.
Before the vote on Amendment No 929
Madam President, Mr Maat may wish to make the same comment as me.
You see, we spoke again this morning.
Amendment No 929, tabled by the Budget Committee, concerns two lines in heading 1b.
They relate to young farmers and environmental measures.
I should now like to propose an oral amendment to change these lines.
We give the young farmers an additional 10 million and take the 10 million to finance this from the environmental measures.
The effect on the overall budget is neutral, but we would accommodate the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development.
Madam President, I can only inform you that the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development fully supports the rapporteur' s proposal.
We have a request to table an oral amendment.
Is anyone opposed to this amendment being taken into consideration?
(As more than 12 members rose, the President deemed the proposed oral amendment inadmissible)
Madam President, in that case the amendment will unfortunately have to be put to the vote in the form proposed by the Committee on Budgets.
You all know that, unfortunately, there is no margin, especially not in 1b.
There is no margin at all there.
Report (A5-0300/2000) by Mrs Haug, on behalf of the Committee on Budgets, on the draft general budget of the European Union for the financial year 2001 - Section III, Commission [C5-0300/2000 - 1999/2190(BUD)]
(Parliament adopted the resolution) Report (A5-0292/2000) by Mr Ferber, on behalf of the Committee on Budgets, on the draft general budget of the European Union for the financial year 2001
Section I, European Parliament
Section II, Council
Section IV, Court of Justice
Section V, Court of Auditors
Section VI, Economic and Social Committee
Section VII, Committee of the Regions
Section VIII, European Ombudsman
[C5-0300/2000 - 1999/2191(BUD)]
(Parliament adopted the resolution)Amendment No 3:
Madam President, on the next amendment tabled by the EDD Group, I wonder whether you could give us some clarification, because it is my reading that if we vote for this amendment, it means our travel expenses will be reimbursed at cost, and if we vote against this amendment, then we maintain the present travel allowance.
I just want to check this is actually the case, because it does change the way people might vote.
The honourable Members can all read, Mr Heaton-Harris.
Madam President, my name appears as a signatory to various amendments on this report.
I would like to assure the House that I have signed no amendments.
I have not joined the Italian delegation for this occasion.
That will be corrected, Mrs Lambert, and now I propose that we move on to the vote.
Before the vote on Amendment No 60
Madam President, it was with great regret that I had to vote against the budget as I find the items devoted to improving the living conditions of the elderly and pensioners to be totally inadequate, or rather completely non-existent.
I furthermore note that a significant proportion of these funds have been earmarked for the notorious Community action programmes.
It is my opinion that these programmes fail to perform the beneficial role that they should in terms of the utilisation of Community funds.
I believe that the European Union must completely reassess the way in which it spends the monies of the 15 Member States.
If the European Parliament were a real parliament, and if Europe were something more than a monetary and free-trade area, then the European budget would represent a great deal more than 1% of GDP.
That kind of budget would be needed to harmonise social security systems and implement coordinated policy on energy and transport.
It would be funded by the standardised taxation of capital.
But it is no good dreaming: the Europe of today is dominated by neo-liberal dogma which seeks to reduce state subsidies and the Structural Funds to the strict minimum.
Instead of controlling the erratic movements of capital, the priority is 'structural reforms' actually aimed at privatising and deregulating anything still left to be privatised and deregulated.
The real surprise in this budget relates to external actions, where selfishness and stinginess are the rule.
Europe has a special responsibility to the Balkans and the south of the Mediterranean.
Contributions that are relatively minor for our richest countries could have a strategic role for peace and development in those regions, yet the choice has been to make significant cuts, which looks like a dangerous policy of burying our heads in the sand.
That is why we voted in favour of the motion to reject this budget, contrary to the guidelines proposed.
In the budget vote we have generally voted against the Committee' s proposals to increase agricultural expenses in category 1.
The reason is that we believe that the EU' s money can be better used in other areas where it is really needed.
It is not reasonable for approximately half of the Union' s total budget each year to be spent on subsidising the production and export of agricultural products.
The current Common Agricultural Policy is not only expensive for the Union, but also contributes to higher consumer prices.
The export subsidies mean that the EU' s food surplus is dumped on the world market at low prices, as a result of which the food industry in many developing countries, for example, suffers serious competitive disadvantages.
The fact that, in addition, the Union provides subsidies for tobacco cultivation is particularly worth commenting on.
The EU' s activities and budget should instead be directed towards cross-border problems that the Member States cannot solve themselves.
The EU' s agricultural policy, in the form of export and production subsidies, should therefore be wound down and, to a certain extent, replaced by subsidies for bio-diversity and environmental measures.
In the matter of the external measures in category 4, we have chosen to vote according to a line which does not require revision of the Financial Perspective.
For us, support for the democracy movement and reconstruction of the countries in the Balkan region is one of the EU' s most important priorities.
It is particularly important to be able to offer subsidies for improving the situation in Serbia.
To request a revision of the Financial Perspective at this stage would be unfortunate.
If the budget plan is revised, we believe that there will be a significant risk of the EU' s costs generally increasing, which is not currently acceptable.
Parliament should therefore act to maintain the Interinstitutional Agreement and to keep the budget within the framework of the budget plan.
We believe that funds for the Balkans can instead be taken from the programmes in category 4 that are sadly not fully utilised at present.
Funds can also be released through mobilisation of the flexibility instrument.
I welcome the recognition in Parliament that although the European Women's Lobby is recognised as a valuable lobby group on behalf of certain women's positions, there are other women's lobby groups that deserve and must receive support, both financially and politically, at a European level.
No one in the European Parliament would support discrimination or violence against women; we must remember that to deny women a voice is a form of violence against them.
The Budget Committee ruled again this year that this was a monopoly situation, regarding this fund under A-3037, which is unacceptable within the European Union, and the budget line should be opened up to other women' s groups.
As things stand the EWL is, and remains, the sole recipient from this budget line for women' s groups.
Other women' s organisations representing many thousands of European women are thus ineligible for funding and left unrepresented.
Democracy and subsidiarity are not served by the EWL having a monopoly and control on all of the woman's budget line.
In the interest of giving fair and equal expression to the voices of European women there must be an end to monopoly funding
It is the duty of every elected representative to ensure that the voice of those who are voiceless is clearly heard.
If the diverse voices of the women of Europe are to be heard, this monopoly funding situation must end.
We must dedicate ourselves to upholding the European ideals of inclusiveness and democracy and resist the pressure of those groups that wish to maintain an anti-European monopolistic control.
- (SV) We feel that the ceiling for the budget must absolutely not be exceeded.
To obtain sufficient economic funds for increased aid to the Balkans, the Member States must reallocate funds from the available budget.
We feel that, if the Member States have the will, they will be able to find available funds that are not being utilised in the budget being worked on today.
. (IT) The Members of Parliament belonging to the Lega Nord voted against the draft budget not because they oppose the idea of Europe but because they wanted to show their disapproval of the distorted way that this idea is being put into practice.
If fine words have led the citizens to believe that the Union was attentive to their demands, their requirements and their needs, the vote today has proved the contrary.
Ladies and gentlemen, you will all be aware that the west of Padania has recently been hit by floods, bringing loss of life and substantial material damage.
While there is unfortunately nothing that can be done to restore these things, aid measures were necessary and it was our duty to provide them.
But this Parliament, which is always responsive to the needs of communities outside the Union, has shown itself hostile to its own citizens when misfortune has struck, in rejecting the amendments that allocated but a few million euros in their favour.
That is why we voted against this draft budget.
Haug Report (A5-0300/2000)
I voted against the Haug report, just as I voted in favour of my group' s motion to reject the general budget for 2001.
First: because the budget of the European Union is not commensurate with the huge economic needs of the Community of the 15, especially of the countries and regions lagging behind.
Secondly: because the new items for the reconstruction of Yugoslavia - which we need and which should be more substantial - have been found by slashing items for food relief, agriculture, social spending, etc., rather than by increasing the budget, which is what the Member States of the European Union should have done, given that they perpetrated and aided and abetted the destruction of the former Yugoslavia.
Thirdly: because the budget remains a mechanism for applying a policy which falls short on the social and development side and which has not been reorganised despite constant warnings of the fall in the euro.
- (SV) As Swedish and Danish Social Democrats, we have today voted in favour of Parliament' s proposal on the EU budget for the budget year 2001.
The budget creates a reasonable balance between the need for budget discipline and the EU' s opportunities to implement important activities.
In proportion to the Member States' finances, the Council' s proposal represents the smallest budget for more than 10 years.
Parliament wants to increase this somewhat, but we still have a good margin to the budget ceiling.
Nonetheless, Parliament has succeeded in driving through a number of important priorities - especially, increased efforts in the fight against unemployment and poverty, a number of important environmental and equality issues, etc.
We have voted against the right' s attacks on the LIFE programme and the European Women's Lobby.
We are firmly resolved to find the funds required in order to be able to provide increased aid for reconstruction and democratisation in the Balkans, including in Serbia, now.
Consequently, we call upon the Council to react positively to Parliament' s initiative for a common and long-term solution before the final decision on the budget is taken in December.
Revising the budget ceiling for external policy (expenditure category 4) is not an end in itself, but we are prepared to do this if it is required in order to obtain the necessary funds for the Balkans.
We take a critical view of the scope and direction of the EU' s agricultural policy.
This needs to undergo more extensive reform in the future, partly in order to provide scope for the expansion of the EU.
The EU' s agricultural policy is far too expensive.
We are highly critical of the overproduction of agricultural produce and of the fact that the EU is using funds designated for information purposes to sell this surplus.
We are also very critical of the extensive subsidy given to tobacco production, which we believe is in direct conflict with the EU' s increased ambitions in the area of public health. On this point, we have voted in favour of amendments that aim to abolish the tobacco subsidy.
We would also like to emphasise how important it is that the implementation of the EU budget is made more efficient, so that we can get to grips with the great backlog that exists in certain areas.
The budget system, like the methods for openness, auditing and political control, must now be rapidly improved and modernised.
We, ourselves, have tabled proposals concerning what is known as the Baltic budget line, but have accepted that this will be put on ice for the time being and until such time as an overall solution to the problems within expenditure category 4 has been found.
However, Parliament has been delighted to accept the Commission' s proposal to establish new budget sub-headings for local and regional cooperation in the Baltic region within the framework of the Phare pre-accession instrument.
We have also voted in favour of an increase in the budget for twin-town cooperation, which we consider to be an important programme for encouraging cooperation at local level within the Union.
- (SV) Where travel expense refunds for Members of the European Parliament are concerned, we maintain our view that refunds must be made only for actual costs incurred for travel on official business.
We have therefore voted in favour of Amendment No 3 from the Group for a Europe of Democracies and Diversities, where this is required.
The Left party supports the idea that the work in progress for a new statute for Members should lead as quickly as possible to a solution in which refunds of travel expenses also reflect the actual costs.
That is the solution to the problem - not unhelpful comments on the budget.
- (SV) The community sector in the Member States has been subjected to major cut-backs for a number of years.
In this connection, it is depressing to see that, within the budget of the European Union, there is an incredible amount of unutilised resources and that, in certain cases, resources are being downright squandered.
If the European Parliament were now to abolish its Friday sittings in Strasbourg, for example, this would save EUR 1 million.
The European Parliament is also pushing hard for contributions to European political parties to be introduced.
It is interesting to note that the EU parties are clearly incapable of inducing either their member parties or the individual members of the member parties to pay a fee for membership of the EU party. Instead, we are forced to finance the EU parties with public funds.
That, if anything, demonstrates the low level of motivation that this EU project has, even among politically active citizens.
Otherwise, we make a reservation in respect of the great outflow of funds that is taking place in the EU via agricultural subsidies, regional subsidies, operation of the Economic and Social Committee, etc.
The public funds that are being spent by the EU can be better used in the Member States.
Rühle Report (A5-0251/2000)
We have naturally voted against the budget for the ECSC, which until the ECSC Treaty expires will continue to rain down subsidies on shareholders in the iron and steel industry.
Considerable sums have already been awarded to the bosses in this sector, allowing them to diversify into juicy new sectors, while many workers - whose jobs have been eliminated - are still unemployed.
Although this draft envisages devoting a certain amount to social assistance, no precise figures are given, while the minimum guarantee should be full salary up to retirement age for all workers affected by future redundancies.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, the ECSC Treaty will soon expire.
Nevertheless, in Germany there is a compromise solution for coal which will run until the year 2005.
I am assuming - and I hope that the Commission will contribute appropriate constructive solutions - that we will have a transitional arrangement to fill the three years between 2002 and 2005.
But for the time after 2005 I should like to make it quite clear that there can be no 10% energy base in the EU Member States which is exempt from all supervision by the European Union's competition authorities.
This is no solution for the future.
This solution would damage the European Union's competition policy and at the same time make energy more expensive - on top of the effect of promoting renewable energies - which would in the end harm Europe's desirability as a business location.
Clegg Report (A5-0298/2000)
Madam President, Ms Giuseppina Cardazzi, who is elderly and infirm but interested in electronics and the Internet, particularly as she is not mobile, asked me to help her understand electronic communication as she wanted to purchase a device that would enable her to access the Internet.
She asked me whether, since she had little money as a result of having to spend a lot on medicines, it was possible to access the Internet for free.
I told her that it was, and it is for this reason that I voted in favour of the Clegg report, as it enables one to access Internet sites by connecting up to the existing network at a reduced cost.
The arguments for promoting competition imply yet another attack on the public telecommunications sector in an area of basic services that are vital to the public, without any corresponding improvement in the public service provided.
As the report states, unbundled access to the local loop allows new entrants to compete with notified operators in offering high bit-rate data transmission services for continuous Internet access and for multimedia applications based on digital subscriber line technology as well as voice telephony services, using local network infrastructures that have already been installed by other operators, generally public service operators.
Furthermore, the haste with which this liberalisation of the highly profitable telecommunications sector is going ahead, following the conclusions of the Lisbon Summit, does not augur well for the protection of consumers' interests or the interests of people working in the sector.
This is another reason for voting against this report.
We are voting against this report even if it does seem a mere formality in the process of the liberalisation of telecommunications.
The amendments add nothing, apart from some further praise for the alleged virtues of competitiveness.
What 'unbundled access to the local loop' actually does is force public operators to put the leasing of public telephone lines out to commercial tender as soon as possible.
So 20 to 30% of the contracts will again be offered to private competition.
Many have already anticipated this directive, like France Telecom.
As well as the new constraints imposed on staff, particularly in the commercial services sector, inequality in the treatment of users is going to get worse.
The regulation of the sector by the law of maximum return will result in the creation of profitable and less profitable areas in the territory covered.
A high quality European public service must be imposed, to include mobiles phones and the Internet, to meet the basic needs of employees and users.
That policy would put a stop to the generalised liberalism that is thriving under the French Presidency.
The liberalisation of telecoms is already very far advanced in the countries of the EU.
Now a further part of the network infrastructure is under discussion: the connection of market entrants and customers to the data transmission network.
This is the next logical step in the deregulation policy hitherto.
But, precisely because we are dealing with the local loop, customers' interests need to be taken into particular account.
Liberalisation of the local loop is actually, of course, about getting the high-speed Internet of the future off the ground (high transmission speeds and low local telephone charges are decisive for this). This being the case, a "basic supply" must also be guaranteed in this sector to all members of the public by extending the companies' Universal Service Obligations.
For example, included in the Universal Service Obligation could be "normal Internet connection" by 2002 and a high-speed Internet connection by 2005, with minimum requirements for quality of service, consumer protection and content on offer and special tariffs for particular groups of society (the disabled, those receiving benefit or on a low income, those who live in outlying regions, and so on).
Since this is not guaranteed in this report, I voted against it.
Jové Peres Report (A5-0273/2000)
Madam President, in this case, too, it was with deep regret that I had to vote against.
Why was it, especially in my capacity of representative of the Pensioners' Party that I voted against?
It was because for some time now the tables of my elderly friends have been devoid of tomatoes, peaches, pears, oranges, lemons, grapefruit and so forth.
The Mediterranean diet, so well-known in Italy, is disappearing.
Why?
Because the European Union is incapable of promoting the development of the cultivation and marketing of fruit.
It is my belief that we must totally change our quota system and at last resolve to provide aid to any farmer who wants to increase their agricultural output.
The Danish Social Democrats have voted against a report that would remove the subsidies paid to the producers of processed fruit and vegetables.
Instead, we support the Commission' s proposal that would rescind onerous administrative procedures and make the schemes simpler and more flexible.
The Commission has actually been friendly towards the producers.
It has proposed a minor restriction on the great 'help yourself' buffet table that the scheme has been to date.
We therefore support the Commission' s efforts at reform and oppose further preferential treatment of this sector.
On the pretext of resolving a number of questions relating to fruit and vegetables, the Commission is proposing serious amendments to the regulations in question, even before the report has been finalised on the results of the previous regulations, which entered into force as recently as 1997.
The Commission' s argument that these amendments regulate individual matters is completely hypocritical and misleading, given that the proposed amendments change the entire Common Organisation of the Market in processed fruit and vegetables, making it much worse for small and medium-sized farmers and much better for the trade and industry and the multinationals.
With processed tomatoes and peaches, it is using direct aid to producers as an excuse to propose abolishing the minimum price.
This price may not provide satisfactory protection for producers, but it is nonetheless a minimum safety valve.
Instead of proposing to enhance it and hence provide an efficient guaranteed agricultural income, the Commission is proposing to abolish it, leaving trade and industry free to step up their exploitation of farmers and trample on the fruits of their labours.
In addition, instead of proposing a substantial increase in quotas, the Commission is proposing to replace them with a system of thresholds so that, with subsidies rendered worthless by joint liability fines, farmers will be lured into producing quantities in excess of the thresholds, which the trade and industry will take as and when they please.
Obviously, the quantities in excess of the thresholds produced by farmers will not have a ready market or a minimum price and will become another weapon in the hands of the trade and industry, which will blackmail farmers and set the price for the whole quantity, even the quantity below the threshold, at ridiculously low prices.
The quotas and the thresholds are like Scylla and Charybdis and to change them is to jump out of the frying pan into the fire.
Add the unacceptably low national thresholds which decimate subsidies to the proposed reductions in withdrawals to 5% for citrus fruits, 8.5% for apples and pears and 10% for other fruit and vegetables in marketable quantities, and it soon becomes clear that there will be no way of disposing of very large quantities of processable fruits and vegetables with the result that overall prices will drop and the crops will be left to rot in the fields and in the cooperative packaging shops, forcing farmers to uproot their crops.
Finally, the Commission has lost no time in taking advantage of cyclical increases in international prices for processed fruit and vegetables during the last marketing year to set subsidies at low levels, subsidies which will apply for several years, i.e. until the next time the regulation is amended.
The proposals for fruit and vegetables are part of the more general, anti-farming direction which the EU is taking, now that it has decided to persecute farmers.
This persecution hits the produce of small and medium-sized farmers in the south particularly hard.
What we need are not attempts to improve on disastrous proposals, as Parliament's report endeavours to do.
We need to reject these proposals wholesale and without equivocation and to call firmly for agricultural policy to be revised for the benefit of the farmers and the countryside.
In a bid to safeguard industrial peace in urban areas, the price of the food package has been kept artificially low for dozens of years now.
The only way farms could survive was to scale-up and undergo mechanisation.
That made them heavily dependent on loans.
There is a lot of money about in the agricultural sector these days, but that does not appear to be a guarantee for a good income or safeguard the future of the business.
My colleague Mr Salvador Jové is only too aware of the bad position which southern European small farmers and farm labourers find themselves in.
Within the existing structure of extensive agricultural subsidies, he is looking for a majority to reach a compromise which will do more to safeguard the chances of survival of this group of farmers.
I support his view, as long as this results in income support for those on incomes which are too low.
If I were to have my way, I would invest less funds in agriculture but within this sector, give more to the poorest.
This line of thinking is at odds with the idea that Europe should collect more taxpayers' money to subsidise the richest and most profitable businesses.
The growing Dutch glasshouse horticulture, which yields a large volume of vegetables, fruit and flowers in a small space, is in a much stronger position than cereal or dairy farms.
Since it appears from Appendix III that glasshouse horticulture does not benefit from the proposed subsidy scheme for vegetables and fruit, I am putting my objections on hold for the time being.
I voted in favour of this report because it lives up to the expectations of Portuguese organisations in the fruit and vegetable sector, which have called for a drastic overhaul of the COM in processed fruit and vegetables, which they consider to be extremely damaging to our national interests.
The loss of 7% of the tomato quota this year and the risk of losing more than 10% of the remaining quota next year have made a revision of this COM before the end of the year crucial for Portuguese farming.
The present report puts forward amendments on a range of points that address the interests of European production in general and of Portuguese production in particular.
These are: the inflexibility of the current system for processed tomato-based products, the quantity levels guaranteed for processed tomato, pear and citrus-based products, the complexity of the operational fund system and the management of export refunds.
It is now absolutely vital for the Portuguese Government not to give in and for it to staunchly defend its specific national interests on each of these points.
Indeed, it would be quite grotesque and humiliating if the European Parliament' s stance were firmer and more beneficial to Portuguese interests than our own government's!
Nicholson Report (A-0276/2000)
Madam President, it is a well-known fact that I am highly responsive to all measures concerning the harvesting of various species of fish, measures which by enlarging the holes in fishing nets allow smaller fish to survive, live longer, grow old and potentially become pensioners too.
However, this is only one of the reasons why I did not vote against this measure.
Why?
I abstained because I feel that in this case, as Mr Bushill-Matthews and the English Members have said, there has been a lack of subsidiarity.
This is a fishing issue that concerns the British, the Belgians, the French and the Irish.
I fail to see why they cannot be left to reach a decision on their own concerning their fish and their fishing.
Cushnahan Report (A5-0284/2000)
Madam President, among my many elderly friends in Italy and elsewhere there is one Chinese man.
This pensioner, who lives in Hong Kong and to whom I read Mr Cushnahan' s report said that it was a wonderful report which covered everything, but failed to say anything about the situation of the elderly in the special administrative region of Hong Kong.
It is for this reason that despite having approved this document, I wanted to emphasise in the explanations of vote that next time it would be a good idea to survey and take into consideration the situation in which pensioners in Hong Kong find themselves compared with pensioners in the Peoples' Republic of China, in order to see whether this reunification has been advantageous or detrimental to them.
Johan Van Hecke Report (A5-0296/2000)
Madam President, it is very important for the European Union to concern itself with the inhabitants of ACP - African, Caribbean and Pacific - States.
Personally, as the representative of the Pensioners Party, I am concerned at the situation of the elderly in these countries.
I have to say that despite approving of the contents of the explanatory statement on page 20, and thus of the need for initiatives for programmes concerning education, poverty alleviation and the capacity-building of democratic institutions, the proposal unfortunately makes no reference to this point.
I believe that we can only help these states if we improve the conditions in which all their inhabitants live, be they young people, workers or members of a group very close to my heart, the elderly people and pensioners who live in the ACP States.
It is extraordinary that the EU is reviewing its cooperation with the ACP countries involved in armed conflicts.
It is important to ensure that aid funds are not used for military purposes.
However, the Member States must have the opportunity to provide support for building up democracy in dictatorships, both bilaterally and through the Commission.
It must be possible to provide education in good administration in order to counter corruption and, in the same way, to support opposition parties.
We cannot therefore support Paragraph 4, which states that aid can only be granted on condition that the country in question has a good administration and respects human rights and the principles of the constitutional State.
Moratorium on the death penalty (B5-0804/2000)
My position on the death penalty today is exactly the same as it was in 1981 when François Mitterand courageously declared his opposition to it while standing for president and then abolished it once he was elected.
I was already against it back in 1981. I am certainly still against it in 2000.
While I can certainly understand the feelings and reactions of the families of victims of what are often appalling crimes, a government cannot answer barbarity with barbarity.
It has no right to do so.
Besides, we know the death penalty is not a deterrent, it is quite unacceptable for countries claiming to be civilised (like the United States) to continue applying it in a wholesale and systematic manner, running an immense risk of making irreparable legal mistakes.
That is why I have voted in favour of the call for a moratorium.
Moreira Da Silva Report (A5-0270/2000)
The problem of global warming caused by concentrations of gases in the atmosphere which exacerbate the greenhouse effect, such as carbon dioxide, is taking on explosive proportions.
It is only three years since the Kyoto Conference and the European Environmental Agency estimates that, if emissions in the EU continue at present rates, instead of an 8% reduction in emissions of CO2 between 1990-2010, there will be a 6% increase, while in the USA the outlook is even worse.
The root of the problem lies in the fact that everything, including the quality of the environment and the climate, is sacrificed to capitalist exploitation of wealth-producing resources and excessive profit.
Consequently, what could be more natural than calling for those who caused the problem to pay to resolve it?
The Commission communication should have been entitled differently, given that it contains no specific policies or measures to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases; on the contrary, it confines itself, as the rapporteur rightly comments, to merely producing an organisation chart and a vague list of common policies and measures.
It restates the position that energy taxation or a tax on fossil fuels are the mainstay of the EU strategy to reduce greenhouse gases.
We disagree with this measure because, whichever way you look at it, the 'polluter pays' principle is a hypocritical principle and its distorted application will ensure that the entire cost of reducing emissions is passed on directly to consumers, i.e. to the workers.
Given the tremendous pressure to find a solution, one might well discuss the imposition of an energy tax on fossil fuels, but only as a measure to complement an integrated policy of measures to reduce CO2 emissions and on the strict condition that the revenue from this tax is used solely to relieve the burden on workers.
We stand by the view that the cost of reducing emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases should be paid for by the real polluters (i.e. large-scale industry) out of their excess profits.
We also agree with the rapporteur' s view that clear priority should be given to renewable energy sources and to giving support to public transport.
We are also totally opposed to the immoral and inefficient system of emission trading between companies and countries.
We fail to understand how it is possible to create an entire market which trades in pollution as a commodity and on which, instead of reducing their own CO2 emissions, some companies buy in surplus coverage from other companies which are within their limits.
Of course, in a capitalist system in which everything can be bought and sold, this is bound to happen.
Although opposed to the Commission communication, the MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece appreciate the rapporteur' s positive comments, which is why we opted to abstain rather than vote against the report.
Global warming and extreme weather conditions are increasingly caused by industry, agriculture and transport.
Despite this, the governments of the richest countries with the highest emission levels of fossil combustion products have failed to bring about a drastic reduction in these emission levels.
The rapporteur is right to point out that the European Commission' s original proposal is inadequate.
Kyoto' s guiding principle was that the rich countries would keep their own atmosphere clean, although they were allowed, up to a point, to add the emission which they were helping reduce elsewhere to their own table of results.
The Member States themselves will need to drastically reduce their emission of CO2 and other greenhouse gases by focusing on renewable energy, public transport and reducing traffic levels.
The boom in the cheap transport of goods by road mainly leads to the polluting industry being relocated from the richer to the poorer countries.
Nuclear energy is not an alternative because that too adds to global warming, emits greenhouse gases and leaves other waste products behind which hardly degrade.
I fear that the forthcoming climate conference will be exploited as an opportunity to moderate the previously agreed commitment to reduce emission levels by 5.2% in the rich countries.
The trading of emission rights may be interesting as an experiment, but it is not a viable solution.
Moreira Da Silva Report (A5-0271/2000)
We are in favour of any tax or levy on the big industrial companies that are largely responsible for pollution in general, and atmospheric pollution in particular.
However, we have abstained, not just because of the derisory nature of the tax envisaged, but primarily because of all the loopholes, which are likely to turn this tax into a modest subscription granting the right to pollute.
Genuine prevention of pollution calls for restrictive measures as far-reaching as confiscation of a polluting company, which no company can wriggle out of.
But beyond immediate measures, atmospheric pollution is a world problem which concerns the whole of human society.
It can only be dealt with satisfactorily by a society which has control of its economy and is not solely driven by thirst for private profit.
I am very keen to present my explanation of vote on this report, an explanation of what was in fact a vote in favour, because I would like to ask you, Madam President, in much the same way as I am asking myself, whether we are entirely sure that the climate changes that we are seeing have been caused by man, by industrialisation and by the emission of substances into the atmosphere.
One or two millennia ago, when industry did not exist, were there not earthquakes, torrential rain and other assorted disasters?
When, Madam President, was the great flood?
How much industry and how many cars were there then?
I would therefore like to us to consider whether these climate changes really can be laid at the door of industry and the way we live today.
The fact that Parliament is dealing with the causes of climate change on our planet is important.
This really is a serious issue in the very short term, and it concerns all of us, both because we all breathe the same air, and because of the storms, excessive rainfall and water shortages affecting every continent to a varying degree.
The developed countries doing the polluting and the less developed or underdeveloped countries about to do so must be made aware of the situation.
So anything that can raise public awareness is useful and a step in the right direction.
That is why our resolution is important, and I have voted for it.
The fight against the greenhouse effect is a major challenge for the industrialised countries and constitutes a specific duty in respect of the peoples of the developing world who are already paying for the consequences of global warming.
Accepting the establishment of a market in carbon dioxide emissions at international level amounts to letting western countries duck their responsibilities by purchasing fictitious Russian emission rights or financing projects in southern countries that are completely inconsistent with their development needs, without any means of checking actual reductions in emissions.
Pollution is not merchandise.
If it becomes a source of profit, the door will be opened to every abuse.
The draft resolution proposes to ratify the establishment of such a system, when 'the technical and legal aspects have not yet been investigated' and 'the functioning and effectiveness of the system must be tested' .
No controls or sanctions are proposed.
Moreover the development of nuclear energy and carbon sinks must be excluded from the calculations for the reduction of emissions.
If the European Union is to respect its commitments it must adopt an ambitious European programme for combating the greenhouse effect without delay - and on a completely different scale from the motion for a resolution in terms of policies and measures.
In particular, action in the transport sector must be taken into account.
Lund Report (A5-0197/2000)
Madam President, I have to say that I abstained from the vote on Mr Lund' s report.
I abstained because I noted that in this report, just like many others, insufficient attention is paid, and an inadequate commitment made, to research. Such is the case with this report, which aims to combat endocrine disorders.
In my home city of Bergamo, many people are suffering from a thyroid disorder the cause of which is still unknown.
This money should be spent by bringing into line and coordinating expenditure on research policy in all the 15 Member States of the European Union.
We have to tighten the purse strings and only spend what is necessary.
In summary, the resolution on endocrine disrupters adopted a moment ago illustrates that far too little is known about the harmful effects, that the European Parliament would like to see more research done and that measures need to be taken on the basis of the precautionary principle.
Although I have voted for the resolution, I would like to make a few minor observations.
I share the rapporteur' s opinion that the arguments in this discussion must be based on fact.
However, I do not share his view that the measures need to reflect the concern among the public.
The average citizen will in most cases be unable to make an adequate risk assessment.
In modern society, with all its consumer goods, such as appliances, we need materials and substances with very specific characteristics.
Everyone, or nearly everyone, accepts and uses these products.
The substances and materials in these products, however, do carry a risk.
As everyone knows, life is full of risks and uncertainties.
The trick is to deal with these risks and uncertainties in a judicious manner.
Science has still not proven beyond reasonable doubt that there is a direct link between these chemical substances and changes in human hormone levels.
That does not detract from the fact that I am delighted with the interest in this topic.
The possible effects of these substances are not insignificant.
If these chemical substances really cause an increase in certain types of cancer, reduce fertility or threaten unborn life, something has to be done about it.
Human life is worth protecting.
Out of precautionary considerations, it is useful to be clear about these substances.
Pursuant to the precautionary principle, the possible harmfulness of dangerous substances, materials and products should be given scientific substance.
Both restriction and acceptance of a certain risk are important in this context.
I do not much like the idea of simply banning substances in a bid to rule out every possible risk.
This opens us up to the risk of a witch hunt being unleashed on all kinds of substances without any scientific basis.
The reversal of the burden of proof is not appropriate either.
To apply the precautionary principle correctly, we also need to know what the harmful effects are of any of the alternatives.
- (EL) Generally speaking, the MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece agree with the main elements which need to be included in the sixth research programme because all the original objectives, such as setting up committees, developing tests, improving monitoring of endocrine disrupters (ED) in the environment etc., are steps in the right direction.
However, we should like to highlight the need for a generally acceptable definition of endocrine disrupters, which we feel should include the effects of radiation (accidents, radioactive waste from peaceful or military applications, without impediment and without restricting the access of official scientific teams to industrial uses).
There can, for example, be no doubt that the effects of radiation cause cancer of the thyroid, as in the case of the depleted uranium bombs used in Yugoslavia.
We also need to define a more specific framework for research, standardising tests and cooperation between various scientific teams so that reliable results can be achieved.
We also need to safeguard and strengthen efforts to identify substances which are suspected of being endocrine disrupters, perhaps within a legislative framework.
Awareness-raising campaigns directed at the public, at consumers and at people in professions which are at risk of exposure to endocrine disrupters (farmers, industrial and other workers) must be a basic concern if these efforts are to be a success.
Similarly, we need to activate the principle of prevention contained in Article 130Ñ of the EU Treaty (in order to control and withdraw known or suspected endocrine disrupters and develop alternative harmless substances).
Adopting a resolution on a Community strategy on endocrine disrupters is the minimum we should do on a complex subject for which no regulation exists.
Listing and studying the phenomenon of disruption of the endocrine systems of men and animals, validating the studies, and demonstrating the causal links between certain products and certain anomalies found in humans and animals (decline in fertility, certain malformations, certain cancers), is a necessary point of departure as long as it respects the precautionary principle and at the same time promotes a need for transparency totally absent from the text.
The fact is that private and public decision-makers will not act unless obliged to do so by public opinion.
The lists of products suspected of being endocrine disrupters must be made known to the public and health professionals, as and when new ones are discovered.
While studies must be conducted to find out about the dangers of endocrine disrupters, firms using suspect products must also be made subject to regulations applicable to drugs, especially in terms of furnishing proof that these products are harmless, whenever they are considered suspect by the European groups of experts.
So an arsenal of restrictive regulations is urgently needed to make it possible to ban such products in the years ahead.
That concludes voting time.
Retail payments in the internal market
The next item is the report (A5-0283/2000) by Mrs Peijs, on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, on the Commission communication to the Council and the European Parliament on retail payments in the single market [COM(2000) 0036 - C5-0103/2000 - 2000/2018(COS)].
Madam President, by 2002, every citizen in the euro area will have euros in their pockets and expect certain benefits from this new currency.
These benefits will not just appear out of nowhere.
We will need to work on those.
I would like to see the Commission communication on retail payments in that light.
What should we all do to ensure that the European citizen, who has relinquished his own familiar currency, will actually benefit from this new currency?
We simply need to make transfers cheaper, quicker and safer.
I therefore expect the Commission simply to transpose the recommendations to change the 1997 Directive, which I made in my report on behalf of Parliament, to a formal amendment to the directive without delay.
What is it about?
At the heart of the matter lies the fact that transferring small amounts still leads to major frustration in SMEs and among individual citizens.
This frustration is the result of the high charges and length of time involved.
This leads me to conclude that the effect which the 1997 Directive had was inadequate.
We need to go further.
The consumer and SME do not benefit enough from the internal market which was completed following the introduction of the euro.
One solution which this report offers is that the infrastructure of these cross-border credit transfers must undergo a thorough overhaul.
It appears that at present, a number of actions are still carried out manually, which leads to high charges and extended handling times.
I therefore call on the banks to take all the necessary measures in the shortest possible time, so that cross-border credit transfers can be carried out fully automatically and thus become a great deal cheaper.
In my report, I have listed systems such as IBAN, SWIFT, STEP 1 and IPI.
These systems can make payments between banks in different countries easier, quicker and cheaper, provided that the banks talk to their customers and make it clear to them that in addition to the permanent VAT number, their IBAN code should now also feature on their letter-headed paper.
In order for this standardisation process to work, we need coordination.
That is why we have tabled an amendment which urges the European Central Bank to assume this coordinating role very quickly, based on its responsibility for payment systems, such responsibility being imposed on the Bank by the Treaty.
We would ask the European Central Bank to do two things.
Firstly, to develop a European standard format for data transmission.
This could be done very quickly, for that format already exists.
This is to replace the national format which is already widely in use.
Secondly, to create a European bank number, like the IBAN, for example.
It is vital that such harmonised formats are used universally in the euro area.
We might need to consider introducing them as a compulsory requirement if this is not done sufficiently promptly.
As I have stated in my report, this automation and standardisation process should be in place three months before the introduction of notes and coins.
That would be ideal.
However, the banks keep maintaining that this is impossible.
By way of compromise, I have proposed an amendment in this respect which states that the banks must be ready by 1 January 2002.
In this way, as soon as the public actually gets to handle the euro, they can straight away benefit from the change in cross-border credit transfers.
The banks alone cannot reduce the total cost of transfers more or less to the level of the cost price for domestic payments.
They need the help of the Member States.
After all, banks have so far been obliged by the Member States to notify their central banks of any cross-border payments over EUR 12 500, for the benefit of balance of payment reporting statistics.
This notification procedure cannot be standardised and is therefore carried out manually.
A very costly matter indeed which will be rendered completely redundant in one market with one currency.
After all, they do not keep records in France of how many francs leave Paris for Auxerre, so why should we?
Moreover, volume and number of retail payments only form a small percentage of the total number of credit transfers.
Your rapporteur is convinced that there should not be any objections to abolishing the report duties up to the full amount stipulated in the directive, namely EUR 50 000.
The loss of data for balance of payment reporting statistics brought about by this change is minimal.
A change related to this is that the money-back guarantee must be increased to EUR 50 000.
At present, banks are almost rewarded when they lose your money.
If you transfer EUR 30 000 and the bank loses that money, it only has a duty to pay you back EUR 12 500.
Banks should of course not lose any money at all, and they must stand surety for their organisation.
This is why we propose increasing the money-back guarantee limit up to EUR 50 000, the amount stipulated in the directive.
According to the banks, nothing ever gets lost, so that can never be an issue.
On a final note, I would like to give consumers more options to transfer money.
I am thinking of insolvent consumers or consumers with no bank accounts.
I would ask the European Commission to investigate whether companies such as Moneygram and Western Union could also fall within the scope of the second Directive on banking.
As a consequence, these companies could have their base anywhere in the European Union, even though they are not banks.
Needless to say, these companies will be subject to the same strict conditions in terms of security and money-laundering.
I hope that this report will encourage banks sufficiently to continue on their path of innovation towards better functioning, cross-border credit transfers.
But in order to grant banks absolute certainty and clarity in their heavy investment programmes, I am expecting the Commission to change the directive by return of post.
Madam President, since the borders between the Member States of the European Union were opened, an increasing number of firms have been taking advantage of the opportunities offered by this common market.
At that time we had to note on the one hand that freight transport had been made considerably easier, but that on the other there were still major barriers and costs associated with making the corresponding payments.
The first study on this subject, which was carried out at the instigation of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, showed at the time that cross-border transfers of over DEM 1 000 cost 25% on average, and as much as 75% in individual cases.
You have to bear in mind that small and medium-sized businesses are of course the ones primarily affected by this.
When the markets between the Member States of the European Union were opened up, our ambition as Members of the European Parliament was never to create access for large companies, which they had of course had for a long time already; it was always to open up this large European market to small and medium-sized businesses.
That is why I am extremely grateful to our rapporteur, Mrs Peijs, for the persistency with which she has pursued this objective for many years, that is to bring down the costs of making transfers between the Member States of the European Union.
I have to stress that there have already been some improvements here, that average transfer costs are much lower than they were when the borders were opened between the Member States, but I should like to emphasise just as clearly that they are still far too high and that further action is needed here.
The banks repeatedly tell us - and with some justification - that the necessary facilities to effect transfers of this kind, the giro systems which exist in the individual domestic markets, are still not fully operational at European level.
A major effort is needed here.
This remark is not directed solely at the European Central Bank, but also at the various banking associations which we have in the European Union.
What we wish to see is not just one single transfer system - which would once again be a monopoly - but competition between different transfer systems set up by different banks and groups of banks, competition which will at long last work in favour of the public and in favour of small and medium-sized businesses.
Madam President, the rapporteur's report is very much to be welcomed because it highlights the problems associated with cross-border payments.
After all, we expect credit transfers to strengthen economic integration in the European Union and not to throw a spanner in the works.
That is what they are doing to this day, as we can see from the many complaints made by small and medium-sized businesses and the complaints made by the public about the high charges for transferring small amounts, which are quite simply very much in evidence.
We even know of cases in which transfer fees for cross-border payments increased when the euro was introduced, and not only by a modest amount.
The monthly cheque to a daughter or son in another EU country, the cross-border transfers for books or services, hotels or trips are being subjected to additional charges, despite the fact that the logistics of cross-border trade are supposed to be less complex and less expensive.
There is even talk of it being possible to reduce costs by 90%, although the financial services institutions impress on us time and again that the higher costs are linked to processing the transfers and not to the technicalities of making cross-border payments.
Nevertheless, it would have been good if a TARGET system for small payments and retail payments had been introduced at the same time as the TARGET system for wholesale payments, because technically that would have been possible; it is just that there was not the same determination to do so as there was for wholesale payments.
In the European Parliament in our work in committee, we also very much regretted the fact that the offer made by the European Central Bank was not accepted.
Here, too, we endorse the statement made by the European Central Bank that one day it should not be any more expensive to effect a cross-border transfer to another EU country than to transfer money within one single EU country.
For years we have been pressing for the efforts being made to be harmonised.
After all, it is in fact very possible to set up a quick, secure and cheap system, and fortunately the financial services institutions have now also come on board; they are on the right track.
But it would have been good if we had already made use of the transitional period.
The many complaints made by incensed members of the public speak for themselves, and I have to say that particularly at this time these are, of course, not likely to increase public acceptance of monetary union.
The political objective is clear and is supported by the European Central Bank: what we need is a European payment area within which everything works just as smoothly as it does in a single EU country.
Small customers are just as much part of the internal market as major customers; there should be no discrimination here.
I believe, however, that there is also more that the governments must do, and I support the rapporteur's report.
At the same time, the reporting requirement for balance of payment statistics should be abolished for small-value cross-border payments for amounts of less than EUR 50 000.
Samples are actually sufficient.
The European Central Bank could help by creating a single European data format for credit transfers and by supporting moves to create a uniform European bank sort code within the international IBAN system.
It is important for all those involved to do what the European Central Bank is obliged to do as one of its tasks laid down in the Treaty, namely to promote the smooth operation of payment systems.
The European Commission does not have the right to set the level of bank charges, but it can use its influence to bring down transfer fees.
In the Union, charges sometimes vary very considerably, but sometimes they are also very similar.
They therefore play a part in restricting freedom of movement in the internal market.
I think that the Commission needs to be much quicker than it has been up until now about finally tabling the results of its investigations into whether there are, in fact, restrictive agreements between the banks.
What is becoming important - and the report rightly refers to this - is consumer preference for electronic payments, and here we call for progress to be made so that here too an interoperable multi-currency standard for electronic purses can actually be introduced.
This initiative, which so far is operational in Luxembourg, France and Germany, needs to be extended to the rest of the EU.
I believe that this report is of central importance if we are truly to succeed in integrating the public and small and medium-sized businesses into the euro area and for increasing public acceptance of economic and monetary union.
We need security, speed and also low costs.
Living in the monetary union also means counting on a reliable cross-border credit transfer system - this is the battle cry for the remaining 432 days.
Madam President, I would like to concur with the rapporteur and her excellent report. She expressed her views in no uncertain terms.
I am also delighted that the European Commission, especially Commissioner Bolkestein and also Commissioner Monti, are putting this matter high on the agenda.
Consumers and companies are becoming increasingly dissatisfied with the high costs for cross-border bank transactions in the internal market, which is completely understandable.
Consumers pay far too much for any type of cross-border bank transactions, as well as for cash, credit transfers, credit cards and cheques.
For large sums, there is a refined network in place in which transfers are carried out as quickly and cheaply as for domestic transactions.
However, the private individual still cannot rely on sufficient support, a reduction in costs and efficient processing of small amounts.
I would therefore like to stress once more the need for efficient, safe and cheap services for retail payments in the internal market to go hand in hand with the introduction of the euro.
The acceptance of the euro also depends greatly on whether consumers and companies are able to use the euro area as an internal payment zone.
It is crucial for consumers to accept the euro.
When euro coins and notes are introduced on 1 January 2002, consumers will start to use the euro frequently, and how are we then to explain that there are differences in its use, even though there is one currency and one euro area?
The idea that transfers in two participating euro area countries will no longer be considered as an international transaction incurring international costs but as a national transfer, will need to become universally accepted.
The high bank charges involved in the completion of the internal market constitute a barrier.
Consumers are discouraged from shopping internationally.
For example, they will not subscribe to a foreign magazine if the international charges amount to double the price of the magazine because of the high bank charges.
In the free movement of capital involving the single currency, there should not be any restrictions or huge discrepancies.
The objective must be to establish one single payment area, where cross-border payments are subject to the same conditions and accompanied by the same costs as domestic transactions.
That, in our eyes, is the only possible and logical consequence of the internal market and a single currency.
The free movement of people in the euro area requires a flexible labour market.
If there are still payment commitments with the home country, this should not prevent people from working abroad.
It is a fact that banks throughout the euro area took a reserved stance before the implementation of the Directive on cross-border retail payments.
Following implementation, a large proportion of the problems also remained unsolved.
Now that the switch-over is drawing ever closer, it really is time for action, by banks and Member States alike.
Banks must commit to implementing the existing standards for account numbering and payment instructions.
In this age of modern technology, the electronic highway could offer a way-out.
Maybe, in fact most probably, the time has come for an Internet bank to be set up which does not charge any costs.
Madam President, Mrs Peijs' report on retail payments in the internal market takes up Parliament' s longstanding complaint about the high cost of cross-border payments within the Union.
It is quite true.
The cost is very high and we know exactly why that is.
The interconnections between the computer systems of the various banks in the various Member States are poor, hence the need for expensive manual operations to process payments from one national system to another.
This is not some fiendish ploy by the bankers, just a technical reality temporarily resisting resolution, but bound to evolve in the right direction in time.
So I think we should put the problem into perspective, especially as cross-border payments represent a very small part of total payments.
The documents I have looked at put their share as low as 0.2% to 0.04%.
In every case, it is really microscopic.
Yet the European Parliament and the Commission genuinely attach vast significance to it.
Why is that?
The first answer is that the European institutions tend to prioritise everything that is cross-border, which is not surprising, after all.
But nevertheless, this bias towards cross-border issues must not mean the great majority of citizens is penalised for the benefit of a tiny minority.
Investment leading to significant reductions in the cost of cross-border payments would not be profitable because it would be amortised over far too few payers. To that extent, the conclusion must be that making that investment under these conditions would mean applying the costs to all bank customers, most of whom have nothing to do with the matter.
I do not really think that, in all fairness, that is a desirable outcome.
It is highly dubious politically, and we must also stop giving the impression that something that is expensive for technical reasons can suddenly become free because a directive has been passed saying so.
I would remind you of the basic maxim everyone learns in the first year of economics: there is no such thing as a free lunch.
Madam President, there is a second reason for the European Parliament' s perseverance.
The Peijs report makes the point in recital D of the motion for a resolution, and I quote: 'the high level of charges for cross-border credit transfers is damaging the confidence of consumers in the euro' .
But why should it damage the confidence of consumers in the euro?
I have just explained why these two problems are not linked, at least not apparently.
The fact is, several years ago, people were led to believe - who knows why, no doubt to get the euro accepted more easily - that this type of cost would completely disappear with the single currency.
Here is a little leaflet.
Millions of copies of it were distributed in public places in France, not least post offices, and this is what it says in the section on foreign exchange commission: 'in the euro area the commission on foreign exchange will disappear' .
Of course, in the strict sense that is true, but the naïve reader, the non-specialist, thought that all the costs of cross-border payments would disappear, when in fact foreign exchange commissions only represented a small part of those costs, just a small percentage.
So now we are facing the consequences of the hard sell of the euro, and that brings me to a conclusion on this issue of cross-border payments, but also, Madam President, on the euro generally.
One can deny reality using words.
You can tell people stories, but sooner or later, your fudging and lies will come back to haunt you.
Madam President, the no-frills approach, which typifies Mrs Peijs, is evident in virtually every paragraph of the present report.
It is only right that the banking sector should be tackled and given a stiff talking to, for while the most important techniques and standards are in place, there is still no flexibility in sight for cross-border credit transfers for amounts up to EUR 50 000.
One would almost be inclined to think that none of the commercial banks stand to benefit from modernising their present working methods.
I endorse the dual-track policy, by means of which the rapporteur hopes to spur the slow banks into action.
In my view, it is not sufficient to exert pressure via legislative measures. These could prove less effective than putting the pressure on by giving rival alternatives generous elbow-room to transfer money within the euro area.
The Commission might well want to give this latter option serious thought, for I assume that the Commission too would prefer to see a reduction in the costs via increased competition.
I have my reservations about one aspect, however.
The demand to bring the costs for transferring money within the euro area into line with those within a Member State could well lead to a situation where the costs for domestic transfers will go up.
This is certainly true of the Netherlands, where for years, customers were not charged for domestic transfers.
This objection does not detract from the fact that I give the rapporteur, Mrs Peijs, all credit for her thoroughness in this matter.
Madam President, Commissioner Bolkenstein, the report that has been drafted with such professional skill by my colleague, Mrs Peijs, and which is now the subject of our discussion, is very important for consumers in the euro area and for confidence in the euro as a whole.
Rarely in this House has there been such strong consensus on how important the report we are dealing with is.
I share the concerns of those of my colleagues who have already spoken and agree with what they have said.
This morning the euro sank to an all-time low.
It was quoted at 0.8240 against the US dollar.
That is a new record.
We therefore have much to do in this area but the political resources and remedies politicians possess to deal with that are fewer than those we are able to employ to resolve this problem of Internal Market payments.
I also wish to thank the Commission for the fact that you have taken legal action against one hundred and twenty banks and banking associations as a result of suspicions over a cartel relating to payments charged for currency exchange in the euro area exchange rate.
This is excellent work on the part of the Commission.
On the other hand, I do also understand the point of view of the banks to some extent.
Although we in the European Parliament now criticise the banks we have to understand that cross-border payments account for only a six-percent slice of all payment transactions, so development of this area is an expensive investment in the eyes of the banks in relation to the benefits gained, from the point of view of the banks at least.
On the other hand, the largest item of expenditure in cross-border credit transfers is manual handling, and a decision should be taken quickly to dispense with that.
Just as Mrs Randzio-Plath said, we cannot order banks to reduce charges as a result of political decisions.
What we can do is compel or put pressure on the European Central Bank to invite banks to attend immediately a meeting of a working party on standardisation at which decisions could be taken regarding the technical circumstances under which costs could be reduced.
We cannot force banks to engage in unprofitable business, but, as politicians, what we can do is support the amendment tabled by Mr Radwan and Mrs Peijs, on behalf of the PPE-DE Group, which calls for measures to be implemented before the end of next year, and, preferably, for these standards to be in place when the euro coins and notes come into circulation.
Madam President, it is a source of deep regret that in a Parliament where a good 85% of people have staked their political reputations on the single currency, we do not have a greater attendance to discuss the performance of this currency.
We know that it is 17 times more expensive to make a cross-border transaction transfer in the euro area than it is to make a domestic one.
People joining the euro thought that if it did nothing else, it would make it easier and cheaper for them to take their money abroad.
We see that this is not happening.
This promised benefit has not materialised; and indeed, as the Commission candidly admitted when this report was discussed in committee, no improvement is expected in the situation after the introduction of notes and coins.
This is another blow to a currency already struggling, a currency that hits a new low on the international market virtually every week, a currency with the bank president continuously under fire for his ill-judged comments to the press, a currency where, on the only occasion when the people of Europe were asked to cast their vote on whether to join or not, they voted "no" in the recent Danish referendum.
We now hear that the printers responsible for producing the notes are threatening to go on strike.
Above all, even the most basic benefit that the euro enthusiasts promised the people of Europe, the reduction of transaction costs, is not being realised.
What are the benefits for the people of the euro area from this currency that has been foisted on them by a political elite in Europe?
This project is not about economics.
This project is not about giving practical benefits to European citizens.
It is and always has been a step on the road to creating a United States of Europe, a political project.
We are seeing that it is failing to deliver any benefits to the mainstream majority of ordinary people in the euro area.
Madam President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, first of all I too should like to thank our colleague, Mrs Peijs, very much for her report and for being so persistent in her efforts to achieve results for the public.
On 1 January 2002, the euro will also become a reality for the public, because then we will have the euro in our pockets.
Today the average fee for transferring EUR 100 to another country in the internal market is EUR 17.10, many times more than the fees for domestic transfers.
In the future, the euro area will also feel like a domestic area and the public do not understand why in this area, in which there are no exchange-related risks and in which electronic payments with Internet banking are increasingly becoming a matter of course, transferring money from Munich to Salzburg is considerably more expensive than transferring money from Munich to Kiel.
The advantages of the euro need to be demonstrated to the public and also to small and medium-sized businesses, precisely because we are having problems at the moment with the acceptance of the euro and it seems to many as though large companies and banks are benefiting from it, but not the man in the street.
For me, the argument that nowadays very few transfers of euros are made to other countries in the euro area does not count either.
That is a chicken-and-egg debate.
We in Brussels are of course experiencing this ourselves as Members, but our colleagues are too, that we do not make transfers abroad because of the high charges linked to the euro.
I am firmly convinced that if prices fall the number of transfers will increase in leaps and bounds and people will avail themselves of this possibility.
I welcome the fact that the Commission is maintaining its pressure on the banks and that it may increase the pressure further with the action it is taking against 120 banks.
The European Central Bank should also exert increased pressure.
The proposal by Mrs Peijs and myself also seeks to bring the banks together around one table, not to lay down the law, but because we simply cannot increase the pressure any further from the political side.
Neither do we want any price regulation in this sector, but we should at least coordinate this.
The ECB would seem the ideal candidate to make progress on single data formats and uniform bank sort codes in Europe.
I also hope that the low prices will not come at one fell swoop in five years' time, but that they will come gradually and that it will already be possible to see some progress as early as 2002.
At long last we will have achieved our aim if the banks compete on offering customers cheap transfers abroad.
Then we will have a real market in this sector.
Madam President, I shall speak in English in answer to Mrs Villiers, who has spoken about the advantages, and possible disadvantages, of the euro.
It is a much debated subject these days, but it does not come within my remit.
So I shall inform my colleague, Mr Solbes Mira, who deals with macroeconomic matters, of the remarks by Mrs Villiers.
I have no desire to add anything to the current debate.
I do not want to muddy the waters.
Madam President, I would like to start by extending a warm thanks to Mrs Peijs for her excellent report on the establishment of a unified, uniform area for payments.
Upon completion of the internal market and the introduction of the single currency, we need a unified area for payments more than ever.
Borders should no longer play a role in future.
In fact, in time, there should not be a discrepancy at all between cross-border and domestic payments.
Both the Commission and Parliament will need to invest many more years of work in order to realise this objective.
In this context, I would like to draw your attention to the date of 1 January 2002.
That date must be considered as an extremely important and symbolic milestone in the construction of the European Union - and I am also addressing Mrs Villiers with this observation.
After all, on that fateful day, 1 January 2002, all citizens of the euro area will have the same coins and notes in their purses and wallets.
After the European passport, this is the second concrete proof, which will actually make a tangible difference on a day-to-day basis, that we all belong to the European Union.
We therefore need to pull out all the stops to turn this new phase into a success.
After all, if the systems for making cross-border payments remain as expensive as they are today, the credibility of the new system of coins and notes will be called into question.
This is why it is crucial that well before 1 January 2002, a whole host of measures are taken, so that these are in place when the new coins and notes are introduced.
The Commission will take a very close look at all the proposals made in the report.
We will especially study the problems in the field of competition.
In this respect, I would like to say in response to the observations made by Mrs Kauppi and Mrs Randzio-Plath, who unfortunately had to leave the Chamber, that the Commission has looked into possible agreements between banks.
This investigation took place in February 1999.
The Commission has sent declarations of objection to banks in six Member States.
That was done in July of this year and the Member States involved are Portugal, Ireland, Belgium, Finland, the Netherlands and Germany.
The relevant procedures and the investigation into the costs charged for cross-border payments is now under way.
In more general terms, the Commission is of the opinion that technological development enables the competition in this field of credit transfers to intensify, for competition will of course lead to lower costs.
We will be exchanging ideas on this topic during the large round-table conference to be held on 9 November next in Brussels.
In the summer of 2001, the Commission will also be presenting a report on the improvement of cross-border credit transfers.
That report - and I am turning to Mrs Peijs in particular - will contain legislative proposals amending the 1997 Directive which entered into effect last year.
I am addressing Mrs Peijs directly because I know she appreciates a clear response in this matter.
Once that report has been drafted - and that will not be by return of post as Mrs Peijs requested, but in any event reasonably promptly - I can promise Mrs Peijs that the Commission will produce legislative proposals in this respect.
On that occasion, we will also be looking into reducing the implementation period for cross-border transfers, which Mrs Peijs calls for in her report.
Even now, transfers take place within three days in 85% of the cases.
It is, of course, our aim to increase this to 100%.
The Commission is trying to exert pressure on the banks with this aim in mind.
Once again, it will be some time before this becomes reality, but next summer, the Commission intends to make a statement on Mrs Peijs' proposal to reduce the period by half.
It will attempt to meet the requirements of the House.
The rapporteur' s report also focuses on the declarations of statistical data which banks need to produce for each cross-border transfer.
These declarations are imposed by the Member States and not by the Commission.
We are of the opinion that this form of collecting statistical data on the Union' s internal credit transfers is a vestige of the past which can no longer be justified in an integrated, unified area and which forms an obstruction to the proper running of the market.
I therefore hope that the Member States too will take prompt action to update their systems for collecting statistical data.
In addition, the Commission fully backs Parliament' s proposals to encourage electronic payment.
It is important, however, that technical and legal security are guaranteed, especially with regard to direct debiting.
We cannot, on the other hand, endorse the report by the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, because this Committee is asking us to take a legislative initiative to bring the costs of cross-border payments in line with those for domestic payments.
We can, of course, agree on the principle of this proposal, but not on the proposed working method.
As you know, we are in favour of free competition, but not of administrative price regulation.
Furthermore, as Mr Blokland was quite right to point out, such a measure could immediately have the opposite effect, because the costs of domestic payments could then immediately increase.
I do not believe that that news would be well-received by consumers who never make cross-border transfer payments.
This brings me to the end of my brief clarification on the action the Commission intends to take on the report by Mrs Peijs.
I hope that the appeals you have made, particularly those directed at the banking world, will be heard.
The Commission and European Central Bank are in constant, and often difficult, dialogue with the banking world to achieve tangible results, and your support in this is much appreciated.
Madam President, by way of reassurance, I would like to say to the Commissioner that the report by the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market has not been incorporated as a document in the EMAC report.
Parliament, in its wisdom, completely shares your view.
Madam President, I am grateful to Mrs Peijs for her last remark, which is also accepted as such by the Commission. As far as this matter is concerned therefore, the Commission can declare its concurrence - in every respect, in fact - with the report by Mrs Peijs.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place at 6 p.m.
(The sitting was suspended at 1 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m.)
Multiannual programme for enterprise and entrepreneurship
The next item is the report (A5-0267/2000) by Mrs Montfort on behalf of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, on the proposal for a Council decision on a multiannual programme for enterprise and entrepreneurship, 2001-2005 [COM(2000) 256 - C5-0274/2000 - 2000/0107(CNS)].
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, we all carry our own list of recurrent disappointments we can do nothing about in our heads, but it is a good thing to have a moan about them from time to time just to show that we do not accept the situation and that impotence does not always rhyme with indifference, not yet anyway.
Listening to what some Members had to say in committee, Members who have been in this House longer than I have, gave me the feeling that this multiannual programme for enterprise and entrepreneurship exercise that Parliament is going through for the fourth time belongs in that category.
In substance, people were telling me that good intentions are always welcome but we need to make sure, contrary to what has always happened so far, that the next report on the subject does not have to make the same assessment as the previous one, because nothing has really changed in the position of European businesses.
So the aim of the text before you today is to transform a pointless compulsory figures test into a promising examination of a freestyle programme where the European Union can add value as long as it understands its place and its role in the arrangement.
The time when the defence of business, especially small and medium-sized business, was like a corporatist battle is long gone, not just because there is only a handful of diehards left who see the world of business through the distorting prism of the class struggle, but above all because, at the start of this third millennium, everyone knows that the issues of employment and social cohesion are crucial for our societies, and business has a pre-eminent role in those issues.
In fact, it is well to bear in mind that, at both the economic and the social level, business leads.
The major job-creator and driving force for social integration, it has also progressively acquired paramount importance as regards training for young people and continuous training, and as it has in the area of land development where it is, in the end, the most efficient instrument.
Recognising this, the Fifteen adopted the Charter for Small Enterprises last June at the Feira Summit.
Its existence is already affording us a glimpse of the considerable progress that can be achieved.
Besides undeniably constituting the basis on which we must construct a policy on business which genuinely serves business, the Charter has the great merit not just of limiting our action to small businesses, but of making them the central point in our thinking, our priority unit of reference.
Parliament, composed of elected representatives who regularly rub shoulders with representatives of small business, is duty bound to present this option clearly, turning it into an objective reality and introducing the only method that can properly embrace the diversity of the world of business.
The SME is not a multinational in miniature, any more than it suffices to extrapolate the difficulties of a small business quantitatively to get a proper grasp of the problems of large units.
It does seem sound policy to favour a pragmatic and hands-on approach, putting the small business at the heart of the system, rather than a proposal merely producing balanced statistics that are quite impossible to use in practice, on the pretext of avoiding a scattershot approach.
So I am glad the Committee on Industry unanimously decided to prioritise a sectoral approach to business, the inevitable choice for identifying as precisely as possible the real and specific needs of businesses whose disparity lends itself poorly to a horizontal approach.
That would not be effective.
Certainly, comparing performance and exchanging best practice are most interesting ideas in absolute terms, but positive intervention in the day-to-day lives of businesses cannot be achieved by that means alone.
So what should be done?
We need to start with three simple ideas: first, instead of accepting that we more or less give up trying to reach as many companies as possible directly, we should use the existing networks whose understanding of real-life situations makes them indispensable partners in the drafting, but also in the efficient implementation of a policy geared to businesses.
That is why the report stresses the need for close links between consulting circles and organisations representing businesses, which have much to teach us and can prevent us from turning a good idea into a bad decision out of ignorance.
Next, we should take care not to make access to capital for firms, especially the smallest ones, even more complicated.
Here we are touching on a key factor in the start-up, development, recovery, transfer, even survival of businesses, and a certain number of decisions that have been taken, or are on the point of being taken, are causing concern.
These range from the obscure reshaping of the respective tasks of the European Investment Bank and the European Investment Fund, to the draft Directive on banks' own resources, which we have still to be persuaded will have an impact on the ability of a business to obtain a loan.
Whatever the case, with the advent of an economy based more than ever on knowledge and technological innovation, the Commission absolutely must ensure that the boldest, most innovative, risk-taking companies are helped to grasp the opportunities on offer and reap the rewards of their enterprising spirit.
Finally, since the spirit of enterprise is inseparable from the notion of responsibility, we should establish clearly what Europe can contribute as added value in terms of business policy.
The political orientation is the responsibility of the Member States.
The Council set that orientation at Feira, with the Charter for Small Enterprises.
By concentrating on coordinating the policies defined in this context and applied by the Member States, and in particular by a commitment to lowering all the technical and administrative barriers that place needless strain on business progress, that approach would find consummate expression.
I hope the vote in this House will replicate the unanimity shown in the Committee on Industry.
That would send out the strong and clear signal the business world needs.
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you in advance for supporting my report.
Commissioner, I know I can count on your energy and determination to implement this programme.
It needs to be linked to other Community programmes and an annual balance sheet should be drawn up so that adjustments can be made if necessary.
In that way we can meet the two challenges of full employment and social cohesion together.
Thank you on behalf of all enterprises, but also on behalf of our societies.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, first of all I should like to congratulate Mrs Montfort on her report and also thank her for the very good cooperation which we have enjoyed. It really has been fun.
Where the economy is concerned, Europe's aim is of course to become the number one in the world and the multiannual programme can make a contribution to achieving this.
However, what is particularly important in this sector is that we promote a spirit of enterprise in society and that young people give more serious consideration to starting their own business or to going into smaller companies.
To do this we need to be active in the context of education in particular.
Until recently, after completing their studies and training, many young people made a choice between going into the civil service or simply into larger companies which are similar to the state.
Here we need to bring about a sea of change.
But we also sense that this is already happening - many young people are in fact also founding new start-up companies, and we should encourage this entrepreneurial spirit.
But I have three specific comments on this programme.
Firstly, the Commission is saying that in the future it will promote and define policies which are enterprise-friendly.
To this end it wishes to introduce a benchmarking exercise, which is certainly an interesting initiative.
We must, however, ensure that it is effective.
At present the plan is that this exercise will be run by the EU and the Member States, which will certainly not give an accurate picture.
If I take my native country, Germany, then one single set of statistics for Germany does not reflect the situation in the regions.
There are huge variations between, say, Bavaria and Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania.
Or take Greater London and Scotland.
Greater differentiation ought to be possible here; the regions need to be involved if we are to get an accurate picture of the impact of enterprise-friendly policies.
Secondly, the Commission is considering taking more of a back-seat role in supporting SMEs.
This is certainly also a debatable step.
The success of assistance to small and medium-sized businesses should actually be measured on how effective it is, and that is why the question certainly does arise as to what extent it is possible to provide this assistance in this form at European level.
But if assistance is withdrawn at European level then the regions need once again to be given increased opportunities to act.
In this context the de minimis rule should, in any case, be re-examined and the group exemption regulation for SMEs should be revised.
My third point concerns traditional companies and e-commerce.
We always draw a distinction between the new economy and the old economy.
Where I live in Bavaria there is one business, a carpenter, who now derives 70% of his turnover from the Internet.
Is that the old or the new economy?
I think that we should merge these two sectors to make the normal, traditional sector of the economy also part of the new economy.
I have two requests of the Commissioner here: the first is for the Commission to support the development of software intended specifically for SMEs, which in terms of size and cost would be suitable for use by the SME sector.
The second is for DG Enterprise, which was formed by merging the industry and SMEs portfolios, to champion SME-related issues with more vigour and to assume a watchdog function in the whole Commission for SME matters; it should scrutinise all the Commission's legislative acts and communications for their effect on SME-related issues.
Finally, I also hope that the assistance programmes which the Commission offers to SMEs in the future are presented in such a way that they are considered from the customer's point of view, so that SMEs can always understand their purpose.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, after eleven years in this House, I can bear witness to the fact that debates on small and medium-sized businesses in our Parliament are neither new nor rare.
It has to be said that on the basis of European Union criteria, over 99% of companies could be defined as SMEs, which is not very sensible.
That very fact illustrates the European vagueness of the concept and explains many uncertainties.
Bear in mind that the first Community action programme in this area was adopted in 1983, seventeen years ago.
Our rapporteur, Mrs Montfort, has done excellent work over the last few weeks, in-depth work in close collaboration with all her colleagues.
She has identified the points where there was a lack of clarity or significant slippage between statements and reality in the Commission' s text.
Her work, in which we have assisted, has consisted of pinpointing issues and trying to establish a more precise classification of the different types of SME, micro-enterprises and craft businesses.
And, along those lines, we too have tabled and pressed for a series of strong, concrete proposals for moving from words to deeds, in relation to SMEs, by giving them access to innovation and electronic commerce, simplifying certain customs formalities for them, ending certain disparities in administration and regulations, developing - and this is important - access to risk capital, developing the Euro Info Centres to broaden the scope of business information and support, and making the framework programme for research and technological development more open to innovative SMEs.
As far as I and my friends are concerned, we have sought to put the accent on crafts and micro-enterprises.
I have asked for environmental and sustainable development targets to be properly taken into consideration, and for access of SMEs to new communications and information technologies to be promoted.
I have also asked that actions geared to specific groups like women, young people and the social economy sectors be encouraged, not forgetting employee participation in the life of these SMEs in general.
SMEs are the major source of job creation, in terms of both quality and quantity, and they play a crucial role in social cohesion and regional planning.
That is why it is very urgent to remove the many obstacles to their development and organise the necessary training.
So, Mrs Montfort, I hope a massive vote for your report will finally allow us to make a qualitative leap forward in this area, and also that certain excessively liberal amendments will be rejected, for instance, on reducing the number of promotional programmes and on creating a new monitoring centre.
If I had to sum it up in a nutshell, Mr President, I would say that what we need here- and if I say so myself - is less ideology and more action.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I would first and foremost like to express a word of thanks to the rapporteur who has indeed compiled her report with great care.
This care is more than needed if we want to establish 'Enterprise Europe' by 2005 and if we want to make the European Union into the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-driven economy in the world.
The amendment to the report in the Committee, partly tabled at my proposal, emphasised that the multiannual programme must be used as an instrument to promote economic growth, full employment and social cohesion.
I would like to stress that this is an important focus, which must be brought more to the fore in the information and information campaigns, because it cannot be emphasised enough that entrepreneurship and an entrepreneurial climate are both of key significance, and that this is the reason why particular attention must be paid to the education and training of young people, as well as to providing permanent training to staff of SMEs.
Today, I would particularly like to make a case for systematically eliminating as many as possible, if not all, barriers which stand in the way of establishing the internal market, and for optimising the competitiveness of SMEs, allowing them to develop in a dynamic and sustained manner.
In addition, I have always been an advocate of underpinning these goals with efficient and pragmatic policy.
I am delighted with Mr Caudron' s final remark which amounts to investing less in ideology, but more in efficient and pragmatic policy, which means that red tape should be kept to an absolute minimum.
In our Union, this should in the first instance translate into simplification of customs formalities, because the fiscal, social, administrative and regulatory disparities between the Member States in terms of costs constitute a substantial barrier to equal access to the internal market.
Finally, I would also urge you to take into consideration the enlargement of the European Union which is upon us.
The effective implementation of the acquis is necessary to ensure that enlargement becomes a win-win situation for the Member States and candidate countries alike.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, first I, too, would like to congratulate our colleague, Mrs Elisabeth Montfort, on the quality of her report on the multiannual programme for enterprise and entrepreneurship for 2001-2005.
She has studied the proposals with great care, and she has taken the trouble to consult with the many parties concerned. That approach has been an asset in defining and optimising the implementation of this programme.
Here I want to stress some of the strengths we need to build on to improve Europe's contribution to business in the new 'knowledge-based' economy.
How can we make a better contribution to Enterprise Europe, as President Prodi called it in a recent speech?
First, every business must be included.
Of course there are large businesses, involving several thousand people, say.
We need to recognise not just what they contribute to the market economy, in terms of jobs and profit, but also their contribution to knowledge through their support for applied research and to the creation of hosts of businesses around them.
Through their contacts with - often public - research laboratories they undoubtedly supplement public funding, which frequently needs supplementing, and enables discoveries to be made.
So it is important to make sure our action here is positive.
Turning now to SMIs/SMEs and micro-enterprises.
As Mr Caudron said, these represent 98% of our economic fabric.
Our greatest potential for adaptation resides in them.
They are the true economic and innovation vanguard, in the front line and openly exposed to the risks inherent in this domain.
We should take special care of them and make sure there are concrete measures which they can assimilate easily.
Secondly, and without going through the measures set out in the report, which are, anyway, the result of an assessment made last year, you will note, all the same, that we are taking up the same old essential points: simplification of the assistance formalities, which are still too cumbersome, and even stifling for SMIs; help with finance and risk capital to ensure greater stability; aid for research into new technologies; establishment of a European standard through the BEST process; aid with communication and information.
These businesses need buttressing within their geographic or technological environment.
We must encourage them, promote local development using local resources, both material and human, and foster their relations with local communities.
Here we should not only be helping businesses with a traditional structure, but also public-private partnerships and cooperatives which are increasingly contributing, among other things, to improving stability and creating jobs.
Thirdly, we must look for European added value.
This could involve, in particular, the installation of a European network, both physical and electronic, which every SMI can join, where they can find information, exchange knowledge through appropriate mechanisms with appropriate ethics, and benefit from the prime advantages the European Union decides to establish for their support.
It seems clear to me that Brussels cannot run everything in this domain.
We need operations in the field, regional delegations the Commission, Parliament or the Council can control, as the Majo report recognised just recently.
Certain intervention issues must also be selected.
They are easy to find: in the information society especially, in that sustainable development we hear so much about, in the fields of the environment, clean technologies, eco-technologies, new energy sources and new materials.
The hallmark of this European aid network should be a number of centres, like the Euro Info Centres.
For an SME/SMI, working with this European network would undoubtedly mean that, where synergies exists, it would not have to form a consortium with several other businesses in different Union countries, which often results in an artificial set-up with masses of paperwork and endless complications.
I really hope the Commission will set up a working group on this topic, involving interested Members of Parliament.
Fourthly, there are the proposals for the European research area we are beginning to construct.
In parallel, we propose to introduce a European innovation area, and I am grateful to Mrs Montfort for having agreed to include that proposal in her report.
We must take account of the results of and follow-up to the work of the Science and Governance Conference held last week in Brussels under the auspices of the Seville Institute for Prospective Technological Studies, because there is plenty of overlap with the subject we are dealing with today.
Finally, I am sure it is time to create a proper parliamentary office for scientific and technological options assessment within the European Parliament, to assist in decisions and monitoring. These exist in the national parliaments and ours would match theirs.
Our President, Mrs Fontaine, is asking us, because we are responsible for STOA, to send a message of support today to the EPTA, an organisation specialised in technological assessment in Europe, founded under the aegis of our colleague Mr Barón Crespo, which is meeting in Berlin on 10 November.
But STOA is not really that kind of organisation and we have specific proposals to make on the subject.
Mrs Montfort, our group will give your report its wholesale support.
Mr President, Commissioner, small and medium-sized businesses, both in the manufacturing and in the service sectors, can only survive on the market if they have full order books.
They only have full order books if they have clients, and these can, roughly speaking, be divided into three categories: firstly, large companies; secondly, private consumers and thirdly, the public sector.
It follows from this that small and medium-sized businesses only thrive if unemployment is low and if public budgets at all levels are free of debt and have sufficient resources to commit to the investment budget.
Within small and medium-sized businesses I should like to pay particular attention to the very small and micro-enterprises, because, of course, here additional specific difficulties compound the situation, in particular in manufacturing.
These companies very rarely have their own research and development capabilities and the danger is therefore particularly great that they will be cut off from the development of new products and the further development of existing ones, that they will use antiquated technologies and that they will not adapt to the demand for increasing quality.
In addition, very often - because the managerial staff are not adequately qualified - the opportunities for support, which are readily available here, are not exploited to the full.
All of this is quite apart from the main problems which to this day have not been resolved: permanent undercapitalisation; very poor access to credit because they cannot provide the guarantees required in normal banking practice; markets limited to their respective regions and cash loss.
This means that a policy focused on small and medium-sized businesses is needed, on the one hand to standardise the assistance programmes and on the other, obviously, to take account also of the specific interests and problems linked to company size, company structures, production lines and so on.
Mrs Montfort's report constitutes a considerable improvement on the Commission proposal.
People might almost think, Mrs Montfort, that you yourself were a committed SME entrepreneur.
Your report is excellent.
Nevertheless, I would have liked even more attention to have been paid to at least two economic trends.
The first is a greater emphasis on - I do not say a change towards but a greater emphasis on - demand-driven economic policy compared with supply-side economic policy.
Secondly, there has also been a power shift within investment policy towards investment for expansion and - to a lesser extent - towards investment in rationalisation.
Looked at another way, this means that the taxpayer makes tax receipts available which companies use to rationalise.
Then they put the people who used to work there out onto the street and say to the taxpayer, now it is up to you again to sort out what happens to these workers who have been shown the door.
Surely this cannot be what economists want.
It may seem perfectly acceptable from a business management point of view because of the profits that it can be expected to generate, but not from the point of view of the overall economy.
I think that we in the European Parliament have a responsibility to the overall economy which takes precedence over our responsibility to the business economy.
Mr President, this multiannual programme provides a European framework for the development of the innovative potential and the competitiveness of industry in the Member States.
In this context, the principle of subsidiarity is afforded the attention it deserves in our view.
We endorse the attention which the rapporteur, Mrs Montfort, is paying - rightly so - to small and medium-sized businesses, and micro-enterprises, as well as to granting priority support to young fledgling entrepreneurs.
The rapporteur has listed a number of key points in a bid to strengthen the European entrepreneurial climate.
For example, she calls for enterprises to have access to new information and communication technology.
The question does, however, arise as to how the Multiannual programme can help enterprises strengthen their competitiveness in specific terms.
Whichever way, the Commission has a stimulating role to play in exchanging regional experience and best practices in this field.
Another of Mrs Montfort' s key points is the improvement, or rather simplification, of legislation and the regulatory structure in the Member States.
We have always been in favour of eliminating unnecessary administrative hurdles for industry.
In our opinion, a third point of concern is the protection of intellectual property rights at European level.
We especially have the patenting of software innovation in mind.
Enterprises need clarity.
In other words: is there still any purpose in investing in this sector?
In this context, the question also arises as to whether Europe is possibly lagging behind the US precisely because of the lack of a European patent on software.
Finally, practice at national and regional level will determine the success of the present multiannual programme.
This is the level at which, according to our political vision, entrepreneurial initiatives should be taken.
European backing for such entrepreneurial spirit is always welcome.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I myself come from a blacksmith's forge; I grew up there.
I am familiar with the problems experienced by a small business.
That is why I should like to congratulate Mr Liikanen, because, today, something has been achieved which is particularly important for small businesses and for our many sole traders.
Unbundling of the local loop will open up new opportunities for competition and will therefore offer new businesses the possibility of making favourable acquisitions and give them good opportunities to prove themselves in this field.
You will see that the programme has been allocated around EUR 230 million; if you divide that by the 16 million small and medium-sized businesses in the European Union the result is EUR 3 per company per year.
The programme is so important precisely because it generates momentum, the right kind of momentum, which is also very important for us as Members.
Take the example of the Euro Info Centres.
My contact there is Magister Leitner, and if I come across a problem related to support programmes or a problem with the European institutions, then I can tell my employers that there is someone there who is competent and in the know, someone who can give information in the shortest possible time about public calls for tender, support programmes or research on infrastructure.
This is excellent for Europe because help can be given quickly and competently in the form of technically correct information.
It is extremely important, particularly for small companies, for help to be given quickly.
For small companies, the three or six months which they have to wait for a piece of information to be forthcoming or for a programme to start is an endlessly long time.
This means that the smaller the company, the more rapidly everything happens, and with new technologies everything is of course happening even more quickly.
We all know that the pace at which we live our lives has become faster because we use mobile telephones, e-mail and the Internet, and this opens up entirely new possibilities.
That is why it is important where financing is concerned for us also to ensure that companies have access to the capital market, not only to the stock market.
Above all, when a one-man company or a company with fewer than 250 employees has a project, it should not need to provide 120% loan guarantees in the form of land to receive financing; it should also be possible for it to be funded on the basis of a good idea.
Unfortunately, we are still a long way from this way of thinking in Europe.
What we still need are more experts to guide our companies through complex procedures at European level.
I should like, by way of an example, simply to mention standards.
In principle a small company does not know very much about how a standard comes into being and how a standard is established at European level.
That is why associations such as NORMAPME are very important, because this is another place where a small business can seek know-how quickly and efficiently, because tenders relating to this may be on the Internet and because, quite simply, this is helpful for its everyday work.
One of the most important points is of course tax rates.
America has an average tax rate of 30% while we have one of 45%, which means quite simply that small businesses here have to be 15% more productive or work for 15% longer for the same reward.
That is why we should make it our business to bring down tax rates as far as possible by introducing less hefty laws, slimmed-down benchmarking and best practices so as to create a simple and well-ordered environment for our businesses.
Mr President, I, too, would like to thank Mrs Montfort for the excellent work she has done.
I believe that the debate conducted within the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, to which I hope Parliament will give tangible substance when it comes to vote, has been all the more valid and necessary in terms of reintroducing into this multiannual programme, which we are going to approve, suitable time and space for small and medium-sized businesses and, in particular, for micro-enterprises and craft industries which are of such great importance to the economy of the European Union.
From this viewpoint, I feel that we cannot approve of the fact that the programme presented by the Commission devotes little time or space to micro-enterprises, in particular, when in recent years the concept of micro-enterprises and craft industries has been gathering considerable momentum.
In fact, we must do more and better for small businesses and micro-enterprises, and above all, we must do this in concrete terms when talking of the information and knowledge economy, research and innovation.
When seen in this context, this multiannual programme can only represent a first step, after which we must continue in tangible terms - and I agree with what Mr Rübig has just said on this - by promoting, for example, the development of the Euro Info Centre network, which is one of the facets and mainstays of action in favour of small and medium-sized businesses within the European Union.
I feel that this network should also be made responsible for the local-level coordination of those European networks that are already up and running.
Furthermore, we must in practice set aside specific and ring-fenced amounts, under European Union actions, for small and medium-sized businesses, within the ambit of all those activities relating to research, innovation, the e-Europe project and so forth.
Mr President, this report is an ode to the spirit of enterprise, but behind the lyricism lie subsidies and aid distributed by the European institutions, because it would seem that the spirit of enterprise needs an injection of hard cash.
The explanatory statement emphasises that the term SME can equally relate to a business employing up to 500 employees and to a craft business employing only two or three people and that, taken all together, these represent 99% of the Union' s businesses.
But how many SMEs are actually subsidiaries of large industrial groups?
And how are the subsidies distributed between them and the craft businesses?
The report does not breathe a word about that, because it would mean admitting that all the talk about small businesses is just a popularity-seeking justification for granting aid to big business.
The national governments, and even the regional and local authorities, already act as gigantic finance pumps to siphon off taxpayers' money, that is to say the amounts levied on the majority of the population including the most disadvantaged, and pour this into big business and thence to proprietors and shareholders.
All the European Institutions think about is boosting these appallingly unfair transfers when, even in the rich part of the continent of Europe represented by the Union, there are millions of people living in poverty.
And if I may, Mr President, I would like to respond to something Mrs Montfort said. It is the big bosses who are waging the class war daily against the workers and the minority she referred to is defending the interests of the working class.
Mr President, first of all I should declare an interest.
I am the absentee boss of a very small enterprise, our family business in London.
I will not say what it does, that might constitute an advertisement, but it was founded by my father, Francis Chichester, and I am very proud of it.
It also enables me to come here and do my work for my constituents.
I would like to welcome any measures, like this proposal and this report, that indicate our support at European level for the importance of SMEs and small businesses in particular.
I would like to congratulate Mrs Montfort on all her hard work in her report which, as we have heard, commands wide support across the House.
In my view, the best thing for small businesses is for the authorities to leave them alone and to desist from the temptation of trying to pick winners.
Diversity, safety in numbers, from which the winners will emerge, is the best way forward.
I am reminded of what the Commissioner said to us a year ago about the experience in the United States, where they are not afraid of failure and they believe in the old Scottish proverb of "if at first you don't succeed, try, try again".
The importance is to strike the right balance, to avoid having a continual situation of people failing at the expense of other people.
I suspect that the real obstacles and hurdles that small businesses face are in other areas of European and national legislation, where they face great burdens in terms of administration, taxation and regulation.
That seems very onerous indeed for small businesses, disproportionately so.
I recently looked at the forms required for filling in tax returns for small businesses in the UK and the detail required great concentration on getting the right answer.
Let me close by saying that in my view the most important thing for small businesses, the best medicine for them, is competition.
That is the way they achieve efficiency, innovation and profitability.
Mr President, we need to highlight the priority which the new multiannual programme for enterprise and entrepreneurship gives to small and medium-sized businesses.
We all know full well that these enterprises have trouble surviving in the current environment; my own personal experience in publishing and bookselling leaves me little cause for optimism because I know the huge, sometimes insurmountable problems which these businesses face, precisely because they are so small.
Because of its financial limitations, I think the multiannual programme merely acknowledges the problem and gives a positive political bearing and encouragement, but is not in a position to give any substantial help or, more importantly, to reverse the prevalent trends in the present economy, which are literally crushing small enterprises in every sector.
It is generally accepted that small and medium-sized businesses are a fount of new talent and innovative ideas, trial goods and services and a spirit of independent creation.
But how many of them are able to convert what are precious elements not only for the economy and society, but also for European civilisation, into real entrepreneurial development?
Very few.
The nursery for small and medium-sized businesses contains several thousand experiments which feed large enterprises with manpower and ideas.
They face tremendous competition and even if they succeed at production level, often presenting new, unprecedented and imaginative proposals, what can they do when it comes to distribution networks, marketing and advertising their products?
Distribution is highly complicated and costly nowadays, it needs large quantities of products and good organisation and it often exceeds the potential of small and medium-sized businesses.
As far as advertising is concerned, it is generally prohibitively expensive.
The takeovers which we have seen grow to mammoth proportions over recent years are literally annihilating these endeavours, stopping them in their creative tracks and robbing the environment of the competitiveness of creativity, in a bid to ensure that the market is left with conventional, stereotypical products.
Mr President, Mr Commissioner, I applaud this document and welcome the fact that Mrs Montfort has had occasion to bring to our attention the important role played by small and medium-sized businesses in Europe.
In fact, I wonder how much longer we will have to wait until the European Union is empowered to amend the regulations that govern small and medium-sized businesses throughout Europe and above all, when we will see a change in a climate which in 45 years of left-wing or predominantly left-wing government has dampened the entrepreneurial spirit of European companies.
In many of the Member States, people who set up their own businesses, rather than being viewed as having created at least one job - their own - are sometimes held to be delinquents, profiteers, thieves or tax evaders.
New companies should be granted exemptions from taxes and charges for a period of at least five years, and we should provide for support to be given to young people setting up in business by an older person who can contribute their experience.
Concerning the aspect with which I am most familiar - that of pensions and social welfare - entrepreneurs working on their own account should receive as much as people employed by others.
In many of the 15 Member States, persons working on their own account have lower pensions, lower levels of mutual assistance and less industrial injury insurance.
This is unjust and I therefore support this report.
Mr President, I think that Mrs Montfort's very comprehensive report has added considerable strength to the Commission's original document.
I am a constructive critic of some of Mr Liikanen's efforts - I think the first document that we saw was not really as focused as it should have been.
Mrs Montfort has brought some valuable focus on the key issues facing small and medium-sized businesses.
I particularly want to mention the innovation in the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, which held a hearing on the issues raised in Mrs Montfort's report.
The more we get people from small and medium-sized businesses across Parliament's threshold talking to us about issues, the better we shall be able to do our job.
This is something that the Committee on Industry needs to do on a regular basis from now on.
In my closing remarks in this debate I should like to come back to this question of focus.
The problem in small and medium-sized businesses is that they do not have a lot of resources to go out and get information, to find out what grants and help are available, to do the sort of administrative tasks that are increasingly being imposed upon them by national governments.
What we need to consider is the way we make information available to them.
What I want the Commissioner to address above all in the range of measures that we have proposed here is making access to support and information easy and quick so that people running these businesses will be able to use the information effectively.
We know that there is a lot of help available across the European Union.
People are always talking about helping SMEs, as Mr Caudron who is a veteran of this process has reminded us, but we know there are many businesses not taking advantage of the help available.
A focused, effective, directed and simple set of measures is what we need if this programme is really going to have the effect that it should have.
Mr President, first I want to thank the rapporteur, Mrs Montfort, and the European Parliament' s committee for the work done on the draft decision.
Thank you too for supporting the Commission' s proposal.
The multiannual programme for enterprise and entrepreneurship will constitute a major instrument in support of European businesses.
It is primarily geared to small and medium-sized businesses.
It is small businesses that suffer most from obstacles to enterprise.
The red tape of restrictions and regulations hits them full force.
That is why we should 'think small first' .
It is also the guiding principle of the Charter for Small Enterprises.
We welcome the principle of amendment with reference to the Charter.
Many amendments refer to micro-enterprises-enterprises and crafts.
We welcome the support given to them.
Account should be taken of that in implementing the programme but there are no grounds for mentioning them separately in the legislative text.
To achieve the objectives of the Lisbon Summit on entrepreneurship and transition to an information society for all, we need dynamic and competitive businesses.
They are the only ones that can provide more jobs and better jobs.
We can only end social exclusion if we have competitive businesses.
We need entrepreneurs from all sectors of society.
More women entrepreneurs, more young entrepreneurs and more entrepreneurs from society strata which do not have the representation they deserve.
They will all have a place of honour in the multiannual programme.
Growing businesses need the type of financing appropriate to each stage of their life cycle.
There are gaps in the market which need to be filled, especially at the start-up stage.
Enlargement and sustainability need to be priorities in all our work.
The Members of this Parliament have subscribed to those principles.
We are likewise convinced of their importance.
We are hoping for a limited number of effective projects, which is much better than spreading them too thinly.
I am grateful for your support for this approach.
Thanks to our BEST process, the Commission will identify and implement best practice.
We will publicise the results widely and keep Parliament informed.
We also need to give careful thought to the level of European governance best adapted to the various initiatives.
We have no intention of imposing ourselves on activities which would benefit by being conducted at national level.
But we will welcome - because we will need it - the participation of the Member States in terms of providing support and information to business on how to access the European market.
The programme will ensure that the networks provide this information.
We need advice from the business world and other interest groups in all our efforts.
We are currently improving our advice structure so as to be able to remain in constant contact with these contributors.
Mr President, European businesses need a good business environment if they are to develop.
The multiannual programme will be committed to improving the modus operandi of small and medium-sized businesses.
Thank you for supporting us in this work.
Finally, I welcome the idea that we should review the implementation of the programme annually.
I have a completely open mind as to the form of that review.
We must think about that together.
Thank you very much, Commissioner.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place today at 6 p.m.
Action plan for Albania and the neighbouring region
The next item is the report (A5-0287/2000) by Mrs Karamanou, on behalf of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, on the Draft Action Plan for Albania and neighbouring regions [7886/2000 - C5-0305/2000 - 2000/2158(COS)].
Mr President, the conclusions of the European Council in Tampere stress the need to cooperate with countries of origin and transit of migrants and refugees and, within this framework on the Council's instructions, the High-Level Working Group on Asylum and Migration has drawn up six action plans, one of which is the plan for Albania and the neighbouring region.
Clearly, the basic objective of the plan is to stem migration towards the Member States of the European Union and repatriate illegal immigrants living in the Union.
Most of the plan therefore contains measures designed to control and reverse migration flows.
Obviously cooperation with third countries may help eradicate the causes of waves of refugees and migrants but this does not mean that endeavours in this direction release the Union from its international obligation to protect those in need or to provide help to combat the causes of migration.
Europeans would do well to remember that the wider the prosperity gap between the Member States of the Union and our neighbours, the greater the pressure to migrate.
Border fortifications and repressive policing measures will not stem the tide of those seeking a share of the prosperity which we all enjoy.
Converting the Union into 'Fortress Europe' may put up the price charged by traffickers but, while there is no legal immigration route, it will not stop illegal entry, which is why we need to give Albania all the help we can in fighting poverty, improving the standard of living and employment prospects, setting up democratic institutions and strengthening respect for human rights, especially the rights of minorities, women and children.
There is an urgent need, following the recent attacks on the Greek minority in Himara, to promote democratisation measures and measures to strengthen institutions and respect for human rights in Albania.
Our basic objective must be to speed up the rate of economic and social development in Albania and to foster its cooperation and peaceful coexistence with neighbouring countries.
This is the only way of breaking the circle of poverty and violence which results in waves of immigrants and refugees.
Choosing a preventative policy is not in keeping with the multi-sectoral analysis which should have informed the work of the High-Level Working Group or with the Tampere conclusions, which stress the need for absolute respect for the right to seek asylum based on the application of the Geneva Convention.
Albania has little experience in questions of asylum and has not yet developed the mechanisms needed to examine applications for asylum and, therefore, cannot yet be considered a secure country for refugees; nor, according to the findings of the UN High Commissioner for refugees, is it economically, politically or socially able to shoulder such a burden.
Of course, the main problem at the moment is the fragile nature of the Albanian political system, the weak role of parliament, the poor state of the legal and judicial system and the lack of government administration and programming.
The country is marked by a lack of security in many regions and high crime rates, especially in relation to the drugs and arms trade, which is why we expect cooperation with the Albanian government in applying the measures proposed in the plan to be particularly difficult.
Efforts are, of course, being made to improve the situation.
However, as the recent municipal elections demonstrated, Albania, as it emerges from a long period of isolation, still has no democratic tradition and that is where efforts need to focus.
Another problem is the integration, using specific means, of Albanians legally resident in the Member States.
So bearing all these problems in mind, the proposals set out in my report include: gradual application of the measures proposed in the action plan, a study of the real needs, such as that contained in the first part, which indicates where the most urgent problems lie; for example, first the economy and democratic institutions need to be developed and infrastructures need to be created in Albania and then the Union can think about signing refugee and migrant repatriation agreements.
I particularly stress the need to take steps to improve internal security, strengthen dialogue between European officials and local authorities in Albania and, as far as the Commission and Council are concerned, to promote specific action involving cooperation with the Albanian, Italian and Greek authorities.
At the same time, we need coordinated action, with the maximum cooperation of Europol, in order to put an end to trafficking and prostitution rings dealing in women and children and the actions of criminal gangs involved in trafficking in human beings, whom they then exploit through illicit employment and prostitution.
Finally, I should like to state that I support the preparatory work to conclude a stability and partnership agreement between the Union and Albania.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, first of all I really must express my surprise that the Commission has allowed a high-level Council working group to do the work that it should, in fact, have done after Amsterdam.
I think that this is a shame, although what the group has done is not wrong because it touches on the right problems and also tries to point out the right possible solutions.
As Mrs Karamanou has already said, since the opening of the Iron Curtain, which was of course drawn particularly tightly around Albania, it has been one of the most significant countries of origin and transit for immigrants entering the EU.
Obviously this creates problems.
However, we also have another problem in Albania.
A considerable number of Albanians are leaving their homeland because of the instability in their country, because of the social difficulties and because of the pre-modern structures of society and family.
They are leaving their country, and as they do so a part of the future of this country is lost.
We need to help to establish a situation in this country which will induce people to stay there, to ensure that security is guaranteed, that there are jobs there and that the people simply do not look for a way out.
Of course, we also need to prevent Albania from becoming more and more of a trade centre for refugees, drugs and trafficking in women.
It is a country in which many are involved, in which many neighbours also get their hands dirty.
That is why we need to help this country.
We will do so as the European Union.
We will train the police.
We will help them with customs, but the problem is that so much is in a mess in this country that obviously progress is only very slow, despite some efforts being made by the government.
I should like to say just one thing, Mrs Karamanou: if Albania is not a safe country of origin and we treat Albanian refugees differently from others, then neither can Albania claim that it wants to enter into a stability and association agreement with us.
It has not yet come that far, but I think that it has come further than you suggest.
For me, Albania is a country to which we can send people back.
People are not persecuted there.
All is not yet rosy either, but it is better than you have described
Mr President, the action plan states in its analysis that the status quo in Albania is worrying.
The poor social, economic and political conditions combined with a lack of or insufficient legal certainty and organised crime are causing migration on a huge scale.
Albania is a significant country of transit and origin for immigration into the European Union.
On the other hand, positive efforts are being made to drive forward the democratisation process and to develop society, which we must and will support.
Restricting the number of immigrants coming into the EU from and through Albania is the main aim of the action plan.
To achieve this, measures are needed which work in two different directions.
Firstly, the positive forces in Albania need to be supported; secondly, legal instruments need to be created for immigration from this region, which restrict or stop illegal immigration and trafficking in human beings, as well as the diverse forms of crime associated with them such as illicit employment and prostitution.
We need preventative measures specially tailored to Albania, which will provide support for building or rebuilding the country so as to enable people to live in dignity in the region.
Many reasons for emigrating, seeking asylum and taking flight would thus cease to exist.
But what we need on the other hand are stringent, uniform legal instruments for immigration in the whole of the European Union.
These legal instruments cannot, however, include provisions to legalise criminal actions.
Gangs of smugglers do not provide a service, generously rescuing people from persecution by totalitarian states.
Paid traffickers, most of whom are involved in large-scale, cross-border organised crime, make cruel profits out of the misfortune and hopes of the people concerned and do not provide magnanimous humanitarian services.
In this context, the proposal tabled by Mrs Schröder, to make EU aid available to the traffickers, must also be condemned as counterproductive and contemptuous of human life.
You, Mrs Karamanou, are certainly right because the traffickers are not the root of the evil.
But the root of the evil is not the European Union either.
The root of the evil are the conditions in the countries of origin.
I welcome the action plan, but I cannot support what Mrs Karamanou says in her report because she does not describe the illegal crossing of borders as a criminal act and therefore says that it is legal.
For us to tackle the causes, however, and not continue just to fight against the symptoms, we need to provide help in the regions concerned and we need to resolve the whole issue of immigration, asylum and war refugees in the European Union by coming up with solutions which do justice to the immigrants but also to the host countries.
(Applause)
Mr President, unlike Mrs Pack, I am of the opinion that the more groups that are involved in Albania the better.
The Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs constitutes a forum in which this issue should be discussed, because these are not issues that can be resolved instantaneously, but ones that we will perhaps be confronted with for decades to come.
It would, therefore, be valuable for the programme that we have before us, and which I feel Mrs Karamanou covers very well in her report, to be subdivided into measures that can be implemented swiftly, medium-term measures and those regarding a legacy of history that we have been combating for 500 years and which will persist for centuries to come.
The legal instruments selected fall into the bracket of medium-term measures; the issue of a group of honest customs officials and unimpeachable judges is an economic issue as well, and one that will take decades to resolve.
Recently, we have, thank heavens, seen positive signals emerging from that part of the Balkans that has an indirect impact on Albania.
The report mentions a remarkable fact - for reasons of brevity I will confine myself to talking about this point alone - which is to say that the action plan for Albania and the neighbouring countries was drawn up by a working party.
Thus it is that documents have been circulating from one body to the next, and the European Commission, for example, refuses to make public the report concerning inter alia even the Customs Assistance Mission (CAM) established in Albania.
Here we have another danger linked to the Albanian question: suspicions are being aroused that someone wants to hide something, to cover up something that in fact does not exist.
Anyone who knows anything about Albania knows that it is somewhat undiplomatic to name the players in public life there, as much can happen in dealings between countries in the throes of change and an industrialised world that has cast itself in the role of aid donor.
But, Mr President, since everything concerning aid to the Albanians is, in fact, quite clear and transparent, I consider the publication of all the documents pertaining to it to be an act of political honesty, and one that would nip in the bud any self-interested speculation.
The overarching issue is, of course, that of providing Albania with all the aid that we can, in order to combat crime and make peoples' lives easier, thereby stemming emigration as well.
Mr President, this is a very good report that is humane in intent, but the aim is nonetheless to stop the flow of human beings from and through Albania.
The EU has adopted a rather sad refugee policy, which is largely based on the idea that we must close our borders.
But how is this to be done?
Why are people fleeing?
Clearly, they are fleeing from oppression, terror and war, but they are also fleeing from chaos and poverty.
Man' s longing for a better life tomorrow - a better life for himself, but perhaps above all for his children - is one of the very greatest and strongest driving forces.
We cannot simply attempt to shut out all those who try to get here.
We need to find better methods.
The hard method - the police - can be used when it comes to the trade in children and women and to slave labour.
The tighter the borders we attempt to create, the more insane forms of refugee smuggling we shall see.
Clearly, there is no instant solution to be found to the entire problem, but in the slightly longer term it is a matter of creating a world of reasonable justice, of security and of opportunities for the future.
This applies both to the Albanian people and to the people of other areas who attempt, via Albania, to reach the land of milk and honey represented by the European Union.
Our forefathers went to the United States to create a life in freedom, as they believed.
We are trying to stand in the way of those who are doing the same thing today.
It is very sad to realise that, today in Western Europe, we are trying to create laws that would punish those who are hiding Anne Frank' s unborn grandchildren.
It is quite incredible that we have reached this point.
Let us try to see the truth with open eyes.
We shall never be able to live in peace and freedom and with prosperity and justice if we perpetrate this appalling injustice on the very closest neighbours of the European Union.
Mr President, Commissioner, the Greens of the EFA Group would like to congratulate the rapporteur, Mrs Karamanou, on her report; which is very accurate.
It is indeed the case that measures must be taken with regard to migration, more specifically forced migration, and that the causes must be tackled.
I would particularly like to highlight the predicament of women and children in Albania.
First of all, it is tragic how many young people disappear, are kidnapped and leave involuntarily, or sometimes voluntarily.
There are no children' s rights in Albania, no playing facilities or women' s rights - there is a great deal of violence towards women in the family by the partner or husband - no animal rights and no human rights at all.
The villages are ecological disaster areas: waste is dumped everywhere, the water is not always drinkable and electricity is deficient.
The people are, of course, hopeful of better political representation but at present, many people still live in fear; fear of all kinds of things, fear of the outbursts of violence which flare up now and again.
There is also a chasm between the donors, that is to say all of us, Europe and the United States, who give money, organise projects and such like, and the actual people in the field.
Another problem which I wanted to touch upon is the problem of the reception of Albanian victims of trafficking in women.
Although they return to their country, there are no reception facilities for them.
There is a reception facility at the ICMC for victims from Montenegro, among others, but not for Albanian girls who return from Italy, Greece, Germany, Belgium, etc.
The appeal of the NGOs, of the women' s NGOs must be acted upon.
There is also the threat that they will be picked up again by the traffickers and returned to the countries of destination.
New life must be injected into the economy and a sound ecological policy must be put in place.
The issue of schools and child reception must be addressed.
Aid must be granted to the people who work out there in the field, in NGOs.
Positive things are being done, the IOM is doing sterling work, so are the European police services, and the KFOR is present, but the local population must also do their bit to develop their country.
Persecutors must be punished.
Mrs Karamanou, congratulations on the extensive, wide-angled approach in your report.
Mr President, allow me to start by offering my warmest congratulations to our fellow member Anna Karamanou on the quality of her work and to highlight her comment that the action plan should focus on providing protection to persecuted citizens, who are subject to constant human rights abuses, and not on how to limit and stop migration towards the Member States of the Union.
We all know that Albania faces acute problems, both as a country and as a society.
The economic, social and political conditions which prevail in Albania force its citizens to seek in migration literally the only possible hope of survival for them and their families.
The situation was exacerbated when action by political forces lavishly supported by the European Union resulted in the pyramid scandal in 1997 and robbed the people of their savings and, at the same time, shattered any confidence in the structures and organisation of the Albanian state.
This situation resulted in a popular uprising which basically abolished the Albanian state, causing huge security, political and economic problems for the Albanian people.
Massive quantities of arms passed into the hands of uncontrolled gangs which soon set up as mafia-type organised criminal gangs.
The whole situation was made worse by events in Kosovo and the NATO bombings, which exacerbated the problems in the region.
To turn a blind eye to this situation and to try and erect walls around your paradise, allegedly to protect it from desperate neighbours is both inhumane and short-sighted.
Obviously, everyone wants to live in their mother country, provided of course that they can live a secure and dignified life there.
On the other hand, however, there is no force which can stop a desperate person.
What we need to do is abandon repressive measures and move in two directions: first, by helping Albania to revive its economy and restore its population there and, secondly, to legalise the Albanian immigrants illegally present in the Union, instead of treating them like second-class citizens and slave labour, and to put them to work where we need them.
There are jobs in Greece, for example, which, if the Albanian immigrants leave, will remain undone, mainly in the agricultural sector.
Let us make use of bilateral agreements to define jobs, periods of residency, places of residency, pay, hours, working and national insurance conditions clearly and legally, so that immigrants can prove their strength and help to improve our economies and build friendship and cooperation between peoples, rather than nationalist, cold-war aspirations.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I should like to start by congratulating Mrs Karamanou on her work on what is in fact a very delicate and important matter.
I think that we need to turn our attention to two - of many - basic issues.
The first concerns structures and procedures in Albania and is even more important following recent events and incidents during the municipal elections, incidents directed mainly at the Greek minority living in Albania.
What happened is proof positive that the European Union' s aim must be to establish structures which will ensure that democratic rules are respected and that the rights of minorities in Albania are recognised and respected.
The second issue is the really huge and complex issue of migration.
It is a very important issue which is being shaped by historical, social, political and economic factors.
Because the problem is complex, we need to respond to it with a complex policy, a policy which brooks no simplifications, a policy which will result in a new legal framework, because a legal framework is a constituent element of a state, but a legal framework which is dynamic and solves problems rather than confining itself to simple repressive action, even where they are the effects of application of the law.
I think that the time is now right to adopt and impose these measures.
We have reached a stage where the conditions are in place and we all accept that if we do so we will be providing a huge service.
Mr President, I welcome the fact that an action plan has been drawn up for Albania and I also welcome my colleague's - Mrs Karamanou's - committed report.
On the basis of her analysis of the political and economic situation in Albania, it is possible for us to reach a better understanding of the causes of the migratory movements and to develop corresponding measures.
I do regret, however, the fact that this action plan, and also the other action plans which have been drawn up, are characterised above all by measures aimed at control and repression.
Albania is one of the poorest countries in the world and has itself taken in hundreds of thousands of refugees.
At present, there is a heavy stream of refugees returning which the lack of security, law and order is actually impeding.
Some of the people being sent back have integrated well.
Young people are having to interrupt their training and are facing an uncertain future.
This is an ill-advised policy.
The reintegration of the refugees must therefore take place under safe and humane conditions.
For this to be the case, it is absolutely essential to draw up plans for a coordinated repatriation operation and, above all, to involve non-governmental and international organisations.
I still judge the situation in Albania to be very serious because of the political instability, the disregard for laws and the extremely high levels of crime.
Year after year, especially in summer, thousands of people risk their lives on their way to the EU.
In so doing, hundreds of these refugees die at sea.
We will never know the true death toll.
Italy's 7 000-kilometre-long coastal border is difficult to police and offers gangs of traffickers, who proceed with remarkable contempt for human life, huge scope for their activities.
Criminals, who exploit the refugees' affliction, must be punished.
The toughest possible action needs to be taken against trafficking in human beings - in particular in small children - and the exploitation of people for illicit work and prostitution.
But anyone who thinks that controlling the traffickers alone would contribute to stopping illegal immigration is mistaken.
We need to step up the dialogue between the various negotiating and advisory forums and we need better coordination.
Only in this way can we together contribute to combating the exploitation of refugees by traffickers.
The Community must support Albania in its efforts to strengthen the rule of law, and also, particularly where financial support is concerned - I should like to stress this - we must not leave Albania and the region to fend for themselves.
Finally, I would take this opportunity to call on the Council once again to take steps to bring the policy on immigration, asylum and combating trafficking in human beings entirely within the Community system.
Mr President, it is very important for the sake of European stability to assist Albania and its neighbouring regions.
Helping democracy to take root and establishing the rule of law are vital.
We cannot forget nations that are in distress: our duty is to support them to the best of our ability.
The action programme for Albania and its neighbouring regions will enable us to increase stability in the area.
The main area of focus must not be how the flood of immigrants and refugees may be brought under control, but how conditions in the region can be improved so that people can stay in their homes.
Albania, and Kosovo in particular, are not yet regions at peace, however, which means that the repatriation of refugees must take place in a controlled way, so that their safety is not jeopardised.
The situation of the Kosovo Albanians has long been very difficult, and it is a great relief that, at last, their rights are being recognised.
But it is just as essential to protect the rights of the minorities in Kosovo: the Serbs and the Romanies.
It will be a long but necessary process to bring about reconciliation between the national groups.
Only in forgiveness is there a revolutionary basis for building the future.
Economic growth enables difficulties to be overcome in crisis areas.
It is not enough merely to pile up aid: we need enterprise at grassroots level and we need to encourage people to stand on their own two feet.
People with the same business affairs in common are peacefully bound to one another.
Money, as is well known, brings peace. The EU CARDS programme is of the utmost importance in this situation, as, without a system of administration that functions properly, nothing works.
We must help them to help themselves.
Right now the region needs a guiding hand.
The EU, as a partner of the Balkans, has a huge responsibility for the future of the region.
We must put an end to selfishness and see our destinies bound together.
Mr President, when about two months ago I proposed that Paragraph 6 of the report should include a reference to the need to improve the security and protection of ethnic minorities and the rapporteur, whom I should like to take this opportunity to congratulate on her work, accepted my proposal, I was of course thinking of the generally poor record of this country in its dealings with minorities on its territory, especially the Greek minority.
However, I must admit that even I did not imagine that we would have such overwhelming confirmation quite so soon of the poor conduct of the Albanian authorities.
Its undisguised violence and forgery at the expense of the Greek minority candidates and voters during the recent elections, as witnessed by objective official international observers, demonstrated that, unfortunately, Albania has little respect for even its most rudimentary obligations as it makes its way towards the European Union, at the very time when Albania itself is calling on the international community to intervene, including militarily, in the defence of oppressed Albanian minorities in third countries and demanding that all the human rights of Albanian migrants, including illegal immigrants, be guaranteed, a demand which we all feel it is advisable for us to attempt to satisfy, and rightly so.
Greece is a typical example; despite providing various forms of generous support to the post-Communist Albanian regime and receiving and welcoming thousands of Albanian immigrants and illegal immigrants, it must now watch as the large historic Greek minority in Albania is systematically persecuted and its rudimentary human, political and cultural rights are repeatedly violated.
All this and the unacceptable events in Himara give us cause, I think, to make a very careful assessment of just how able and willing Albania is to take on the accepted European criteria in the areas of human rights and democratic freedoms and, by extension, to modulate and adjust our general approach, our action plans and the various benefits which we provide this country accordingly until such time it revises its policy.
Mr President, I agree with Mr Dimitrakopoulos that the central issue in respect of the problems in Albania - be these of an economic, social or internal security nature - continues to be that of helping that country to reinstate the rule of law, bring security to the citizens, and restore the credibility of institutions and local administrations.
Without this rise in the democratic barometer in that country, and in view of the latest electoral shenanigans and the denunciation of the gerrymandering that went on at that time, it is clear there can be no other way of ever resolving Albania' s problems.
I welcome the fact that the report at last takes into account and develops two points to which we Italians attach great importance.
Firstly, an unstable Albania means instability in the Balkans and an unstable Balkans means instability for Europe.
This is an awareness that we must all help to foster.
Secondly, another reality is that the pressures brought about by migration and the fight against criminality, both of which originate in Albania, cannot be shouldered by Italy and Greece alone.
I have heard many declarations of solidarity and willingness to help, but I must remind you that the only real solidarity shown so far has come from people living in border areas within Italy and by local institutions.
I have seen no sign of this solidarity that is supposed to bind Europe, now that it has come to sharing the problems of another people.
However, what I cannot accept in this report, and I will state this quite frankly, is that it confuses cause and effect, which is to say it confuses a procedure for the carefully considered issuing of visas, and hence the possibility of migration, with a cause, that of illegal immigration.
Things are completely the reverse, so let us not confuse cause and effect.
Above all, I find it unacceptable and negative vis-à-vis Albania that we should in a sense intimate that illegal immigration could be tolerated.
This is something of which Albania has no need.
What Albania does need from us is tangible economic aid and genuine solidarity, but also a little firmness, because it must, with our assistance, go about reconstructing for itself a framework for the rule of law.
Mr President, for many people in the EU, Albania is far away, further than the back of beyond, and yet the Albanians are one of the oldest European civilisations.
In the Middle Ages they fought against the Ottoman invasion and they defended themselves against them as Europeans until well into modern times.
They have suffered particularly badly from European disregard.
In the nineteenth century, better prospects were held out for all the Balkan nations at the Congress of Berlin in 1878.
In Berlin, the Albanians were almost brushed aside from the table - their views were not taken into account - and in the twentieth century, they have suffered greatly under one of the most terrible ideologies of the twentieth century, namely under socialism and communism in a particularly brutal manifestation.
That is why, today, we have a European responsibility for this European Albania.
That is why I welcome the line taken in the report and the approach adopted by the action plan.
However, we need to make absolutely certain that we do not operate double standards.
Much has been said here about minority rights.
I should like to say that we are right to demand minority rights of the Albanians.
But if we do so then we must also introduce them across the European Union.
We have not managed to do this.
We do not have any European standards on the protection of minorities.
In all Albania's neighbouring countries - apart from Kosovo, where the Albanians are in a majority - we have Albanian minorities, and we can demonstrate here what the EU's standards on minorities are.
I should like to make a second point.
Like Mr Lisi, I believe that we need to incorporate burden-sharing in our policy on asylum and refugees.
But the problem is that we have fought for this very point, and neither in this House nor in the European Union have we achieved a majority in favour of a system of burden-sharing based on quotas.
Precisely in the case of Albania we see that it can affect any Member State.
That is why it is important for us not to spend any longer tinkering about with the symptoms, but for us finally to establish a policy on asylum and refugees based on solidarity, with fixed quotas and a stable system of burden-sharing, before catastrophe strikes.
Mr President, the conclusions of the European Council at Tampere called for firmer external action in the area of legal and internal affairs.
The action plan being discussed is a major measure to strengthen external action.
The enormous institutional changes that came out of the Treaty of Amsterdam have had an impact on the way asylum and migration are dealt with.
The Community can now respond to the demands of the European Council by making use of its new powers regarding foreign policy and its programmes connected with external relations.
In connection with the Stability and Association process we are discussing issues of immigration with the Albanians as equal partners.
There should be similar sorts of discussions going on in the region as a whole.
Since 1991, Albania has been granted a total of 750 million euros in multi-sectoral aid within the framework of the PHARE programme.
In the last two years the country has been granted an additional 250 million euros in humanitarian aid under the ECHO programme.
Legal and internal affairs are an important element in the CARDS programme that followed PHARE.
We wish to emphasise in particular the fact that we fully support the comprehensive approach and aim on the part of the High Level Working Group on Asylum and Migration to discover the real reasons for enforced movements of population.
The General Affairs Council adopted the first five action plans last October, and they concern Somalia, Sri Lanka, Afghanistan, Morocco, and Iraq.
The action plan for Albania and its neighbouring regions was adopted in June this year and it is thus the sixth in order.
The European Council at Tampere urged the Council and the Commission to report on the progress of the Working Group' s work in December this year.
The report will discuss the action programme for Albania and its neighbouring regions in detail.
The draft is being discussed today in the Council.
The Commission is playing an active part in compiling the report.
I would like to thank the rapporteur, Mrs Karamanou, and the whole Committee for this very thorough report and I hope that the Council will give consideration to the points of view expressed in it.
I wish to raise three points for consideration, which the Commission regards as particularly important.
Firstly, the Commission supports a balanced, impartial approach to the measures proposed and to their implementation.
In this, we are of the same opinion as the rapporteur.
Secondly, the situation seems to be excellent as far as the aims in the action plan for the year 2000 are concerned.
The Commission has been involved in drafting the report on the implementation of the action plan.
We also want to thank the Member States for their input with regard to this work.
As I have already said, the Community aims to implement its aid programmes as efficiently as possible.
This provides the focus for the work of the Union as a whole.
Thirdly and lastly, the action plan and its way of implementation must be observed regionally.
The Stability Pact for South-East Europe offers an excellent forum for this.
The parties to the Stability Pact have already delivered several opinions along these lines.
We may also adopt a more optimistic attitude towards the summit to be held next month in Zagreb.
Thank you, Commissioner Liikanen.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place today at 6 p.m.
Better lawmaking
The next item is the report (A5-0269/00) by Mr Wuermeling on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market on two Commission reports to the European Council:
Better Lawmaking - A Shared Responsibility (1998) [COM(1998) 715 - C5-0266/2000 - 1999/2197(COS)];
Better Lawmaking 1999 [COM(1999) 562 - C5-0266/2000 - 1999/2197(COS)].
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, first of all I should like to thank you for still being here to take part in this debate this Thursday afternoon.
I should also like to thank my colleagues in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market very much for the constructive and in-depth discussion we had on this subject.
I am also most grateful for the supporting opinions of the other committees, and should like to express my thanks to Mr van den Berg of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs and Mr Candal of the Committee on Petitions.
Indeed, we had a very earnest and also very self-critical debate about the quality of European lawmaking and the application of the principle of subsidiarity.
What conclusions did we draw?
We established that the quality of lawmaking leaves much to be desired, particularly in the eyes of the public.
There, frustration with, but also alienation from, European law becomes apparent from time to time, and we should like to urge Parliament, but also the other Community institutions, not to shy away from paying painstaking attention to detail here, to work with precision, and also to make the necessary time and staff available to do this.
But it is not only the quality of lawmaking which is crucial; we also need to be shrewd about the quantity of lawmaking, because not every problem in Europe is automatically a problem for the European Union.
We expressly declare our support for the points made by the Commission in its strategic objectives for 2000 to 2005.
It says that we need to concentrate on our core tasks.
It can, nonetheless, be a painful process to give up dossiers on which one has been working.
Unfortunately, examples from the very recent past show that the Commission, and also the European Parliament, do not always succeed.
You will remember the provisions recently presented to us on climbing ladders.
I remember standards for ship survey organisations - I hope that I am not causing the interpreters problems - and I remember a proposal for a Directive on ambient noise which actually intends to produce noise cards for the whole of the European Union.
The Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market explicitly calls on the Commission to resist the legislative pressure to which it has itself objected.
This is no excuse for doing things which are actually superfluous.
But of course, this request is also directed at ourselves to be sparing with European regulation.
We are helped here by the principle of subsidiarity which, in the view of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, should also be applied when deciding whether to make a particular matter the subject of internal market legislation.
This principle should also be observed in full for green and white papers and for action programmes.
The European Union cannot claim to have a monopoly on competence here.
Here, too, specific authorisation is required, together with thorough verification of compliance with subsidiarity.
On this occasion, we have also discussed a tendency which we find worrying, which is for more and more decisions to be taken away from the institutions which actually have the democratic legitimacy to do this.
The introductory comments in the Commission's White Paper on good governance set us thinking.
If then a comprehensive set of networks is to be formed, if more soft law is enacted, if interpretative guidelines are adopted by the Commission and if many issues are resolved by agreement between the parties concerned, then this may well all be justified, but it cannot impinge on the responsibility of the legislator.
We ask the Commission here quite specifically to observe the clear demarcation of responsibilities both between the EU and the Member States and within the institutions.
With this report we want to send out a signal to the public that we are taking their complaints about the deficient quality of lawmaking and the complaints about over-regionalisation and centralism seriously.
I would ask you to help us to send out this signal, and to vote in favour of this report of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market.
Mr President, may I first, on behalf of my group, congratulate the rapporteur very warmly on his report, which certainly gives a very good, consistent and comprehensive picture of the situation as he sees it.
Nevertheless, my group tabled a large number of amendments both in committee and in the plenary, and the fact that it did so is no reflection on the quality of the report, but because we are, after all - particularly on the issue of the scope of the principle of subsidiarity - of a different political opinion.
We want a strong union which takes full responsibility for the tasks incumbent on it, which creates a well-functioning internal market and which actually makes it possible to strengthen social and regional cohesion.
It has to be possible for the Community to act wherever this makes it possible to achieve improved and increased European added value.
It is particularly important for this strength of acting at Community level to be emphasised at this time.
Firstly because, in view of the forthcoming enlargement, we are in especial need of a strong European Union if we want to help the future new Member States and their peoples, and also if we want to overcome the many crucial tests facing us in our Member States.
Secondly, we in the European Parliament, of all people, should be emphasising European togetherness and the Community aspect, particularly at a time when we are seeing that the commitment of the governments of many Member States to this is declining, and that short-sighted, egotistical nationalism and a desire to go it alone are gaining increasing ground.
But it is precisely when we want the creative power of the Community to be at work in all the central and important European issues, and when this is also accepted and supported by the public, that it is certainly necessary for us to concentrate more than ever on the essential points and to delete a good many of the points from our present agenda.
I am also convinced, if we can agree on what is necessary and right, that it would be better to do this on a case-by-case basis and to remove anything superfluous from the agenda.
It is certainly easier to make pragmatic decisions in individual cases than it is in general reports and debates of principle.
This is particularly true of the principle of subsidiarity, but it also applies to the quality of legislation.
Instead of having abstract arguments about general principles, we should consider the necessity of individual projects more often in this House and we should also invest more time and resources in legislative quality.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I would first and foremost like to thank the rapporteur, Mr Wuermeling for the work he has invested in his report.
It is of course quite a significant topic, although this is not immediately evident from the small number of members present in this Chamber to continue with the debate.
This Parliament produces European legislation much like a conveyer belt.
All too often, however, we are forced to conclude that this European legislation is packaged in a language which is too technical, too legal and too complex, so much so that this European legislation becomes unusable, as a result of which the intended goal, namely to make legislation in the European Union transparent and unambiguous, is not achieved.
European legislation must be a flexible and practical instrument which also becomes accessible to the average citizen pursuant to the principle of subsidiarity and reasonableness.
I was delighted to note that Amendments Nos 3, 4, 5 and 6, which I tabled myself, have been approved by the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market.
Indeed, the objective of these amendments is to continually evaluate the subsidiarity reports, to check on a regular basis whether they are up-to-date and to investigate beforehand whether certain regulations and/or directives are indeed useful.
I am also in favour of making codified proposals with regard to amendments to existing EC legislation, so that the amendments can be integrated into the existing directives or regulations.
Finally, I am an advocate of setting up some kind of scoreboard for redundant legislation.
It is beyond question that redundant legislation needs to be abolished, for it is indeed not sufficient to restrict the inflation of legislation; rules and regulations must also be drafted in clear language and the obligations pursuant to these must be easily understood.
I therefore hope that the report will be adopted without further amendment, by the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, and that it will be a useful instrument to simplify European legislation and to render it transparent and effective.
Mr President, it is a great pleasure to have the opportunity of commenting on this report by Mr Wuermeling and on the fundamental underlying question of making our law in Europe good law and clear law.
I congratulate Mr Wuermeling on his report.
Etienne Dumont and his great English master, Jeremy Bentham, were inclined to make the point that since laws are always in some measure coercive, they are always in some measure evil.
They may be necessary evils where they control yet greater evil; but they should only do so proportionately to the evil to be met and dealt with.
We can accept this point and this report reflects that spirit, in demanding clarity of law, simplicity of law and proportionality of the legal means to the public end sought.
In addition, and vitally, the report raises the issue of subsidiarity, which is in some measure controversial in this Chamber tonight.
Subsidiarity, indeed, comes from the work of Pope Pius IX and therefore from an enemy of the Benthamite approach to law.
But here two different traditions of thought come together.
It is not a good thing to take decision-making away from the most local level at which it can be efficiently exercised, whether that be the level of the individual, the family, the village, the town or whatever.
I receive letters from time to time, one only last week from one of my constituents living in a remote part of the West Highlands of Scotland.
He said to me: "What are you people out there doing? For 2000 years or more people have been safely drinking the water from the burns (the little rivers), and now they are prohibited from doing so.
Elaborate schemes of water purification are imposed upon them to no public good."
I hear similar things from residents of the Island of Islay, where the proposal for the protection of the local seal colony by a grand international body is resented, because the people have looked after the seals better for the last 2000 years than we think a grander organisation is likely to do in the future.
The point is made.
Law should be made close to the people, and local knowledge, whenever it is the most relevant knowledge, should always be applied, rather than the grand over-arching scheme.
It is, however, also true that there are some public goods that can be pursued only at the most general level and there are, indeed, aspects of environment protection, aspects of species protection, for example, aspects also of single market law, aspects of law against protectionism, aspects of law to govern the Internet, which can only be approached at a level at least as general as the European level.
The principle of subsidiarity, properly understood, points us in both directions: take decisions at the lowest level possible, but acknowledge that the lowest level possible may be indeed a very high level, when general goods are at stake that will be lost unless protected on the same terms everywhere.
So that makes this stress upon subsidiarity very important.
I think my friend Mr Medina, and his colleagues, are wrong in saying that this is only a political principle.
It is a constitutional principle and, like all constitutional principles, it has on the one side a political impact when we, the legislator, decide what law to make; but it has, on the other hand, a legal impact when it comes to the question of how the courts should interpret and apply the law.
May I finally commend to the House Amendment No 1 which asks that the Commission and the European Union take seriously the fact that we have, as well as the Union of the States, autonomous self-governing communities within.
I represent Scotland in this House.
Scotland and England formed the United Kingdom by Treaty in 1707 and have maintained it since then.
For 290 years, however, Scots law, which remained a distinct body of law mid-way between the civil law of continental Europe and the common law of England and the Americas, retained a distinct system but was legislated only from Westminster.
We have created a Scottish Parliament in the last year.
Scots private law has been sent back home; Scots criminal law has been sent back home.
It would be an irony indeed if, at the very moment of achieving that, we were to transfer the whole of legislative power over private and criminal and commercial law to the Union.
I do not think that is what is intended or will happen.
But it is important to bear in mind the interests of subsidiarity at levels below the Member States, as well as between the Member States and the Union, and there is no reason at all why the constitutional principle that is at stake cannot be interpreted widely and generously at all levels of this great Union.
Mr President, I think we should be very pleased with the quality of this report.
Our fellow citizens often see subsidiarity as a vague concept, but they can certainly appreciate its proper application.
Mr Wuermeling has made an excellent presentation of subsidiarity, guaranteeing decision-making at the most relevant level.
We would actually like the Commission to give us more details on the proper application of this principle for each proposal, so that a real balance sheet can be drawn up at the time of the annual report.
It would also be very worthwhile if the Commission could make an inventory of the existing body of law in the light of that principle, to make it simpler, more transparent, more effective and more relevant, and to repeal superfluous texts, as Paragraph 6 of this report invites it to do.
For example there is Directive 79/409, which has prompted the tabling of a written statement on the management of wild birds, already signed by a large number of Members.
A text like that needs revision when it no longer responds to its initial objective and has become out of date and inappropriate, otherwise it will be a source of disputes as harmful as they are unpopular.
While I share the rapporteur' s concern about quality legislation, I am even more concerned than him about real complementarity between our Parliament and the national parliaments.
They must be asked to participate fully in a better application of the principle of subsidiarity.
Who better than they to assess what they are actually in a position to achieve at national level and what should be done jointly at European level?
The Heads of State and Government, to whom this report is addressed, will have an excellent opportunity at the IGC to assess which measures should be taken at European level and which at national level.
In conclusion, I would say that while I find certain amendments very constructive, I wonder about the logic of certain others which seem to ignore the reality and importance of a principle enshrined in the Treaties.
Mr President, Mr Wuermeling has done a first-class job on this report.
In presenting a report calling for simpler and clearer lawmaking he certainly had to match his expectations of that with the quality of the work he produced himself.
The report is a model of concise and clear drafting and I hope colleagues will take that very seriously indeed.
I want to reinforce the points that have been made about subsidiarity but I want to put them in the broader frame of the reform of the European Commission.
It is quite clear from all the communications we have seen, and particularly the importance that the Commission is rightly attaching to matching competences with resources, that the Commission itself realises that it has to produce less legislation and that it has to think about putting more resources into enforcing what it has already done.
Arguably we have too much law in place now that is improperly enforced.
If we have law in place that is not being properly enforced, it is not effective at all.
We need to look at that as part of the review that is called for here.
I attach considerable importance to this point and I particularly welcome the emphasis that Mr Wuermeling has given to aspects of scrutiny by national parliaments.
One major problem in the European Union, and this particularly impacts on this committee from the internal market viewpoint, is what has now become widely called the gold-plating of European Union legislation.
It is not enough for the Commission simply to look at transpositions into national law.
It has to look at what national parliaments have done with that legislation.
There are many examples where we see that a comparatively simple piece of simple market legislation - a common standard, a single principle - has become over-complex, over-enforced at national level and has caused considerable difficulties.
I would ask the Commission to have a serious look at this problem of gold-plating.
Let us take, shall we say, six clear examples and look at how they have been transposed in detail, how they operate within the countries, how they are being enforced and make a really clear and transparent assessment of the effectiveness of the legislation, because if legislation is not effective, then we have all wasted our time.
Mr President, I should first like to recall the kind reference Mr MacCormick made to my intervention in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market.
Mr MacCormick stated - it is, in fact, true - that I had said that the principle of subsidiarity was not a legal principle but rather a political principle.
Having studied the report with great care, I have come to the conclusion that it is not even a political principle: it is a theological principle.
Mr MacCormick, himself, has just pointed out that the principle was expressed by a pope, and it is clear that it is impregnated with theological considerations.
I should like to recall that in the seventeenth century a great Dutch lawyer, Hugo Groot, better known as Grotius, one of the founders of international law, warned theologians to stay out of legal matters with that famous phrase, 'Silete, theologi, in munere alieno.'
At these moments I should like to express my sympathy, my admiration and my pity for the Commission for having to live with this kind of principle.
The second paragraph of Article 5 of the Treaty establishing the European Economic Community is utterly unintelligible.
This definition is a circular definition, not a legal definition.
It states that 'In areas which do not fall within its exclusive competence, the Community shall take action, in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity, only if and insofar as the objectives of the proposed action cannot be sufficiently achieved by the Member States and can therefore, by reason of the scale or effects of the proposed action, be better achieved by the Community.'
Nobody can understand that.
Neither can anybody understand the Protocol annexed to the Treaty of Amsterdam to define subsidiarity, nor Declaration No 30.
The poor Commission has made a very commendable effort with the documents 'Better Lawmaking 1998' and 'Better Lawmaking 1999' , in which it tries to be tolerant with this nonsense approved by the governments in the Treaty on European Union and the added Protocol.
The report by the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market did not gain much enthusiasm from its Members.
The proof is that, of the 17 Members on the Committee, 8 voted in favour and 9 abstained.
In other words there were more abstentions than votes in favour.
The reason why there was so much abstention is that we Socialist Members on the Committee - and some other Members - were expressing our scepticism regarding the overvaluing of the subsidiarity concept in the report.
The subsidiarity concept as put forward in the report by the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market is a concept which has been exalted to heavenly heights, and therefore as a theological principle it lies beyond the scope of the Community.
We have submitted 12 amendments to the report by the Committee on Legal Affairs.
We also support Amendment No 13 by the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party.
We hope the House can accept our amendments, and if so we shall vote in favour.
Otherwise we shall be obliged to vote against.
Mr President, I will use this brief intervention to support the amendment tabled by Mr McCormick, which I believe has the merit, in this case, of having pinpointed the fact that the principle of subsidiarity, besides being a legal principle and, perhaps, besides being a theological principle, is certainly a principle of great existential importance, which is to say that it can immediately be related to the daily lives of our citizens.
What in fact is the state, or in any case a governmental body, if not the fruit of a pact for freedom between the citizens?
In this sense, if there has been a pact for freedom, the state is the guarantor of any attempts that its citizens make to meet their own needs, it is not the master of them.
If it is a guarantor and not a master, it immediately follows that in the structure created by Mr Wuermeling, under which powers would be devolved to the Member States in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity, what should subsequently be guaranteed is that an identical process must also be followed by these same Member States.
Observance of the principle of subsidiarity should therefore be guaranteed right down to the smallest communities, to autonomous units, to intermediate groups, social groups, families and citizens who are the only true sovereign power when it comes to legislative and administrative action.
It is for this reason that I would like to state my support for Amendment No 1 to Paragraph 11a, tabled by Mr McCormick, which would seem to reproduce and propose in a sound and upright manner an interpretation of the principle of subsidiarity that is not theological but constitutional, as it should be.
Mr President, the truth is that with this report and a few opinions something has occurred that reveals how complicated it can be to legislate or even just deal with reports in this Parliament.
I drew up an opinion within the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs which in principle was linked to this report, but it ended up referring to a different report on the SLIM project.
Regardless of the reasons that may have caused this mistake, it is certain that it is motivated by the constant initiatives, originating in the Commission, that are carried out with regard to legislation.
The Commission is aware of the inadequacies of Community legislation and so continually issues documents saying that we have to legislate better or we have to simplify the legislation.
I referred to this in the report on the SLIM project, because Community legislation - and Mr Medina has just proved it by reading out one of the articles of the Treaty - is difficult to understand, even for the experts.
Mr President, any of the observations I made about the SLIM report could equally apply here.
And I say this from within the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, which is the one most concerned about the proliferation of legislation and the lack of clarity in these texts.
Yet the little confidence we may have in the improvement of legislation does not lead us to the same interpretation of the principle of subsidiarity that the People' s Party on the right of this House has reached.
If we took this line of reasoning to the extreme, we could ask the Community not to do whatever the Member State can do.
Coming down from this, we have just heard Mr Mauro support the idea that the family should do everything, that the municipalities should do everything, and any kind of administration should disappear.
This would be anarchy, an idea that we, of course, do not share.
Mr President, first of all I apologise to you, the Commission and all my colleagues for being late, but I have come from another meeting and could not get here any earlier.
Several accomplished speakers from the European People' s Party have already taken the floor to express the views of the group.
Let me, then, give an overall view.
First of all, I think, of course, that the Commission' s work is laudable and often extremely difficult.
In this document entitled 'Better Lawmaking' there are barely two paragraphs on subsidiarity.
This is evidently related to the difficulty of this principle, which we have even described as theological.
Nevertheless I believe we have to insist that as it is in the Treaty it is a principle that can stand before the Court of Justice.
It is true that we do not yet have a case based on a breach of the principle of subsidiarity, but it is there and we cannot ignore that.
In other words, Mr President, the principle of subsidiarity is probably the principle that fuses, brings together and sums up what the building of Europe is all about, because ultimately it is nothing but the political will that is included in the Treaty.
An understanding of the principle of subsidiarity depends greatly on what the political will is at any moment.
I am therefore not very enthusiastic about certain aspects of the report, because I would have liked the report to have been more 'communitising' as regards the internal market, and on this point, especially, these are clearly not the prevailing winds in the report.
As regards the rest, Mr President, the report deals with other issues that are not on the same level.
Codification and simplification are important and laudable issues, but only a matter of good legal technique.
I would therefore ask the Commission to provide us next year with a report on the implementation of the principle of subsidiarity with all its consequences, and another report on the implementation of good administrative and legislative techniques.
Mr President, thank you for allowing me, as rapporteur for this report, to make one additional comment on Amendment No 8 which was tabled by the Group of the Party of European Socialists.
Much has been said about subsidiarity being a theological principle.
I should like to recall a speech by John Paul II of four weeks ago in which he explicitly welcomed the fact that the principle of subsidiarity was being applied politically.
I should like to recommend to all colleagues that they follow this wise piece of advice.
That was not a procedural motion but I think you are entitled, as rapporteur, to make that point clear.
I give the floor to the Commissioner.
Mr President, I would like to begin by thanking the rapporteur, Mr Wuermeling, and the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market for their work on better lawmaking.
We are dealing with an extremely important issue.
We must always ask ourselves whether we need legislation to solve a problem.
The second question is, if we need legislation, should it be at European level or national level?
Thirdly, if we decide to legislate at European level, how can we guarantee that the legislation is simple, clear and can be transposed?
Fourthly, is there any way other than legislation of meeting the same objective at European level, such as soft law, a code of conduct or co-regulation?
I also agree with the report and views expressed in the discussion here that enlargement will present a major challenge vis-à-vis the quality of legislation, owing to the economic, social and legal problems which the new Member States will bring with them.
This must be respected and taken into consideration by EU legislators.
Subsidiarity, proportionality, better quality legislation, simple regulation, increased codification: all must become major political issues on which we will focus.
Actually, this screening of the existing acquis communautaire is often a very useful exercise in showing that it is not always necessary to legislate at Community level or whether a law is too detailed for legislation at the Community level.
I do not want to go into a deep discussion about the theological or political history of subsidiarity.
What is important for the EU institutions is that we have a strong commitment to improving the quality of legislation, especially with regard to subsidiarity.
The Commission is making both political and internal efforts to incorporate subsidiarity into legislative proposals.
The initiative to prepare a White Paper on governance, for example, is an attempt to promote the principle of subsidiarity at all levels.
The rapporteur mentioned the question of soft law recommendations or other agreements.
I think they are extremely important issues to discuss.
I see here some colleagues of yours who played a considerable part in the regulation on the information society and the Internet.
Is it possible to regulate the issues when technology moves extremely fast?
Is there a risk that we will put brakes on development if we legislate?
Is there a risk that technology will move so fast that the problem will have changed before legislation is ready?
That is the area where we must look at issues with a very open mind.
I will take a very personal position by saying that there can be new types of governance here, where regulation and self-regulation can be complementary and not alternatives.
But what is important for voluntary agreements or self-regulation is that they must be implemented, we must know that they are enforced, we must know how we can monitor that what has been agreed has happened.
Then it is important to see what the European Parliament's role should be in discussions: there can perhaps be open discussions, debates, dialogue, which guarantee that the European Parliament is part of the debate.
However, the more we go into the details of information technology, the rapid changes on the Internet, the more convinced I am personally that detailed regulation is not the solution to this problem or, if it is a solution to something, it is not the problem which is faced by information technology.
There are also other areas of the internal market regulations which are very complicated.
I will just mention so-called pedestrian-friendly cars, which the Commission will discuss in a few weeks time.
This directive could be 64 pages long, extremely detailed, mathematical, and involve a lot of engineering expertise.
Is that an area where we should go for detailed regulation, with guarantees that will be implemented everywhere or should we consider whether a voluntary agreement, provided that it can be enforced and controlled, as an alternative?
These are the kind of debates that we need to go through in the next few years.
I hope that this report, which we Commissioners were given last year, will in future include subsidiarity, better regulation and assessment of alternatives, while respecting the legislative authority of the Council and Parliament.
Finally, I want to take into account the criticism which we have seen in Parliament's report.
It is concise and clear.
I will transmit the message to my colleagues in the Commission and the Commission will do its best to react positively to these in the preparation of the next report.
I hope that we can continue this debate so that it is not only a routine matter on Thursday afternoon but part of the central debate on Community legislation as a whole.
Thank you, Commissioner.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place at 6 p.m.
(The sitting was suspended at 5.27 p.m. and resumed at 6 p.m.)
Vote
(Parliament adopted the resolution.)
Report (A5-0287/2000) by Mrs Karamanou on behalf of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs on the Draft Action Plan for Albania and the neighbouring region [7886/2000 - C5-0305/2000 - 2000/2158(COS)]
(Parliament adopted the resolution.)
Sylla (GUE/NGL).
(FR) Mr President, forgive me for interrupting the sitting, but the news reaching us from the Ivory Coast is extremely grave, with civil war breaking out at this very moment between supporters of Laurent Gbagbo and Alassane Ouattara.
This morning we asked the President to send our congratulations to the self-proclaimed candidates, but I think we ought to be calling for democratic elections to be held that include all the parties which were excluded by the military junta. The alternative is the risk of seeing an inevitable slide towards a total balkanisation of the region.
Thank you very much for your statement, Mr Sylla.
With your permission I will pass that information on to the President.
Report (A5-0269/2000) by Mr Wuermeling, on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, on the reports from the Commission to the European Council:
Better Lawmaking - A Shared Responsibility (1998) [COM(1998) 715 - C5-0266/2000 - 1999/2197(COS)]
Better Lawmaking 1999 [COM(1999) 562 - C5-0266/2000 - 1999/2197(COS)]
(Parliament adopted the resolution.)
Explanations of vote - Peijs report (A5-0283/2000)
I voted in favour of the report, despite the fact that I did not get a number of amendments through, because it also concerns the excessively high exchange and transfer costs in the euro area.
On 4 July, the Commission issued a warning to banks in Belgium, Finland, Portugal and Ireland on account of anti-competitive practices in connection with their exchange charges for currencies in the euro area.
It sent statements of objections to nearly 120 banks and banking associations.
The banks were given until the beginning of October to reply, but at the same time it was made clear to them that the Commission would severely punish agreements to fix charges, which would stand in the way of introducing the euro notes and coins and harm the consumer.
Since 1 January 1999, exchange rates have been irrevocably fixed.
It is understandable that the public is disappointed about the continuing high charges, because since this time the banks have no longer been faced with exchange-related risks.
These charges still exist, both for exchanging cash and for making cross-border payments.
In light of the fact that we are now living in a single market with a single currency, it is unacceptable that these excessive charges should continue to exist.
This continuing state of affairs could have an adverse effect on the public's attitude towards the euro and its acceptance of it.
If the banks do not cooperate and continue to levy high charges in the euro area, there is a grave danger that consumers will call into question the point and purpose of the euro.
I would call on the banks to adopt the standards developed by the European Committee for Banking Standards (ECBS) as soon as possible, because these will allow cross-border payment instructions to be forwarded directly and automatically between banks.
A survey in the 11 countries of the euro area has shown that consumers still have to pay costs of an average of EUR 17.10 to transfer EUR 100 between Member States.
This intolerable state of affairs must be brought to an end as soon as possible.
Banks and credit institutions need to do far more to reduce the costs of transferring small amounts between the Member States.
I would make a firm plea for transfers to be made less expensive, more efficient and more reliable.
Following the introduction of the quasi euro, everyone has noticed that withdrawing money from their bank accounts becomes more expensive when they cross the border.
The old exchange rate difference between buying and selling has been replaced by a fixed levy per money withdrawal.
If, in 15 months' time, the same coins and notes are introduced in 11 Member States, it will be more expensive to get hold of that single currency outside the country in which you live.
The same irritation is felt when it comes to the high bank charges for small non-domestic payments.
For the people living in our countries, the borders are simply maintained, even if the countries pass many of their powers to the European Union, and national banks merge across the borders.
Apart from the UEN, which is acting as a mouthpiece for the French banks, every group is in loud protest against this state of affairs.
But what do we do about it?
Commissioner Bolkestein replied that he believes the problem can be solved by research and free competition rather than price regulation.
His passivity is the best guarantee for permanent charges and continuing frustration.
As long as banks are only designed to make huge profits and are not brought under democratic control, this abuse will continue to exist.
Karamanou report (A5-0287/2000)
Mr President, we took a great deal of care over preparing the Karamanou report in the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs.
I should like to thank Mrs Karamanou for the effort which she put into this.
In the process, we reached compromises with which we were not always satisfied but which, by and large, were acceptable.
This makes it all the more disappointing that this report has been completely transformed into an ideological report by one unacceptable amendment - Amendment No 18 - tabled by Baroness Ludford.
That is why we had to reject this report, and I should like to say to the Liberal Group that this will put a permanent strain on the cooperation in this House whenever the Liberals in the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs table further amendments through Baroness Ludford which originate in the left outside the committee.
I do not believe that this is any basis for constructive cooperation.
Mr Posselt, that was all most interesting, but it has very little to do with the way in which you voted.
Nevertheless, I did not cut you off.
(The sitting was closed at 6.36 p.m.)
New EU/Morocco fisheries agreement
The next item is the oral question to the Commission (B5-0546/00) by Mr Varela Suanzes-Carpegna on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries on the state of negotiations for a new fisheries agreement with Morocco.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I must begin by lamenting the fact that the Commissioner for Fisheries, Mr Fischler, cannot be here today.
I have been talking to him in person this week in connection with a fisheries event taking place simultaneously in Brussels, which we have already criticised in our Committee on Fisheries: a seminar on control over fisheries is being held, to which MEPs were invited during a week in which we also have a plenary sitting in Strasbourg, the timetable for which was known a year in advance.
This is therefore doubly serious.
I have made this known to Mr Fischler and I am now repeating it publicly here.
Faced with this situation and the imminence of negotiations which might begin next Monday in Brussels, I do not think the Commission will give us much information today, due to the fact that it will do this - we hope - on Monday 30 October.
The logic of not unveiling here - as the Commissioner himself said to me - the strategy that is to be revealed at the said negotiations, is justified and worthy of respect.
So, as chair of the Committee on Fisheries, I would like to use our oral question and this debate to talk to both sides - since our motion for a resolution is addressed to both sides - about a few issues, and I would like to do so very calmly.
First, I would like to emphasise the great concern of the Committee on Fisheries over the huge delay in negotiations - almost a year from the end of the previous agreement - which is the reason behind our oral question, which was formulated in September.
Secondly, I would like to emphasise the agreement reached within our committee - and I would remind you here of our powers regarding an assent which is necessary for a fisheries agreement with Morocco - an agreement to convey the unequivocal message contained in our committee' s motion for a resolution which all the political groups have negotiated and presented together and upon which we are voting today.
On the subject of the said motion for a resolution, I would like to highlight our firm support for the European Commission to continue negotiating with Morocco, and our call for Morocco to negotiate and find the best, most beneficial solution for both parties, as this is possible and must be found.
As stated in our proposal, it is impossible that within the context of close relations of every kind (political, economic, commercial, financial, cultural, etc.) between two parties who have signed an association agreement for there to be no room for the fisheries cooperation that the European Union is asking for.
There is plenty of room for cooperation in the field of fisheries, and with willingness on both sides, it can, and must, be achieved.
There need only be one yardstick for the conservation of fish stocks.
The European Union applies to its common fisheries policy the fundamental principle of responsible fishing and the conservation of resources, which are essential conditions for everyone, for the Moroccans, for the Europeans and for the non-Europeans who fish in Morocco.
On the other hand, having said this, we also maintain that not just any agreement will suffice.
It must be an agreement which provides an impetus for fisheries cooperation and the Moroccan fishing industry, but which also fully satisfies the fisheries interests of the European fleets.
It would be a pity for so much effort not to lead to a solution that we all want so much, or for our relations with the sovereign people of Morocco to be obstructed or clouded at a time when the new young monarchy is initiating a stage of progress that inspires hope and when relations with the European Union must play a decisive role in supporting such hope.
I repeat, it would be a pity to dash so much hope for the future and so many possibilities for mutual understanding.
We also tell the Commission in section 8 what we expect from it should it be unable to reach a satisfactory agreement.
From this rostrum and with the weight of representing European democracy on our shoulders, I call for good sense and wisdom from both parties, who will meet in Brussels on 30 October at the highest level - the European Fisheries Commissioner and the Moroccan Minister for Fisheries if, as I hope, his attendance in Brussels is confirmed, and the technical delegations, with the Moroccan Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs of Morocco, if this too is confirmed, with the Director-General for Fisheries of the European Union as chair - so that serious dialogue may take place and solutions be found.
I will end, Mr President, by saying that there are many ways of reaching this agreement and there is still time, although unfortunately not much.
This is what the people of the European Union, whom we represent here, are demanding.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the Commission has maintained a constant position throughout the contacts it has had with Morocco, a position which reflects the mandate approved by the Council in October 1999.
It is now appropriate for us to initiate a new phase in our relations with Morocco, in a spirit which is best exemplified by our practical proposals concerning the aid that can be given to encourage growth and development in the Moroccan fishing industry, in line with the priorities set by the Moroccan Government in its five-year plan.
All the efforts we have achieved over the last few months whenever the parties concerned have had meetings at a technical or political level, have essentially focused on outlining a new partnership in the fishing industry, a partnership which must be well-balanced and to our mutual advantage.
Following the last visit by Mr Fischler to Morocco on 16 October, when he was received by His Majesty, King Mohammed VI, and was able to talk with the Moroccan Prime Minister, Mr Youssoufi, as well as with the Minister for Fisheries, substantial progress seems to be within our grasp.
We may quite rightly assume that the discussions held resulted in the actual initiation of talks on the content of a new partnership in the fishing industry.
We agreed that the new form of cooperation thereby established must take account of the interests of both parties and we took note of the fact that Morocco considered the potential spin-offs of a new partnership in terms of jobs to be an important element of our cooperation.
The Commission emphasised on behalf of the Community that it was ready to provide Morocco with assistance in developing its fishing industry, but that achieving this objective must not make us lose sight of European interests linked to the possibility of sustainable fishing activities in Moroccan waters.
From our standpoint, it is of vital importance that Community fishermen resume their activities at a level compatible with the obligation to guarantee sustainable resources.
Consequently, we have reached a consensus to work together with a view to achieving a responsible partnership, and Morocco will give its views at a meeting to be held, as you have already pointed out, in Brussels, on 30 October, that is, on Monday.
Finally, let me stress that, if the European Union and Morocco hope to cooperate in the future, flexibility is needed on both sides, as extremist demands will lead us nowhere.
It is clear that all our efforts are currently directed towards seeking an equitable agreement with Morocco. But the Commission, in consultation with the Member States primarily concerned, is also considering measures that could be taken to help the industry in question if no consensus is reached on a new partnership.
The Commission is optimistic that it will be possible to establish a balanced partnership with Morocco.
It states that it is, in any event, too early to predict the exact nature of the measures that would be taken if Morocco were to adopt a negative stance.
Mr President, Commissioner, tomorrow it will be exactly a year since our last debate here in Parliament on the subject of Morocco.
It is hard to believe that a whole year has gone by.
A great deal of water has flowed under the bridge since, and yet the agreement has expired and not been replaced.
We hear talk of extremely difficult discussions and tough negotiations.
So, here we are a year on, and we could almost be having the same debate.
But that would get us nowhere.
I had hoped that reason would prevail, apparently in vain.
Now we have the Commission's press release and Mr Busquin's announcement this morning.
A Moroccan delegation will present its position in Brussels on 30 October. Commissioner Fischler has also confirmed this to me.
Mind you, we are talking here about the Moroccan position.
That will not bring the negotiations to an end.
My question is, have they even begun?
Or are we clutching at straws here?
We held a special meeting of the Committee on Fisheries this week and passed a joint resolution intended to back up our oral question this morning and underpin our concern.
My problem with the committee meeting and with the resolution itself is that we may be intervening in an ongoing procedure and, so far, we have not exactly learned anything new.
Would we have done better to postpone?
But then, do we have enough time?
I understand full well the concerns of the Spanish and Portuguese fishermen who are affected.
As a Member of the European Parliament from the German coast I can comprehend what the fishermen and their families, who have literally been high and dry for months, are going through.
A few weeks ago, I myself was in Algeciras on the southern coast of Spain, which is not far from Morocco.
The boats were tied up in the harbours and the fishermen were reduced to idleness.
They are dissatisfied and disappointed with Europe.
The fact that the agreement has still not been renewed is having huge social and economic repercussions because it affects both the fishermen and over 20,000 employees in the processing industry.
There is, however, one piece of good news: financial compensation has been extended to the end of this year, although it is just a drop in the ocean.
Of course the agreement with Morocco is a political issue.
And sensitivity and diplomacy do, of course, have their place in politics.
Now is not the time, with hardly any light at the end of the tunnel, to start banging our fists on the table and making demands.
I think we banged our fists on enough tables last year and should proceed with caution.
Caution is the watchword.
But do we still have enough time?
Unfortunately negotiations are dragging on.
I would like to see the Commission and Parliament working together to get things moving.
Would it be totally unreasonable here to call for the European Parliament to be directly involved in the negotiations?
The importance of the agreement and its financial repercussions on the Community budget justify our involvement.
If this is self-evident, why have we done nothing about it?
Do things need to be hidden behind closed doors?
I am most curious as to the latest developments, as to how the next few crucial days will turn out and as to what can or must be done to bring the negotiations to a successful conclusion.
I am tentatively expecting a fast and satisfactory outcome.
I wish the Commissioner all the luck in the world and bid a very warm welcome to the Moroccan delegation.
Mr President, the absence of Mr Fischler from this debate is significant, but I consider the absence of Mr Smidt, the Director-General, to be even more so.
I can understand the Commissioner' s reasons, but not those of the Director-General.
Mr Busquin, it is said that the Commission is a collegiate body. I, however, believe that if this really were the case, this difficult matter of the Fisheries Agreement with Morocco would have been addressed from the start with a global approach, involving all the Commissioners.
I doubt that until now you will have heard of this problem, which is to be presented in this debate in all its harshness.
You will leave here today wiser and the only thing we would like is to leave more informed.
It is cold comfort that the European Union is financing compensation for fishermen and shipowners.
From day one, what they have told us is that they wanted to fish.
In any case, the aid will end on 31 December, the date planned for the conversion of the fleet.
What a beginning to the third millennium for the European Union: we are converting the fleet because we have been incapable of negotiating a new Fisheries Agreement with Morocco.
Eleven months after the expiry of the previous agreement, nobody is assuring us that we will reach an agreement before 31 December.
What has not been achieved in eleven months will be difficult to achieve in a few days.
Mr Busquin, I have sometimes, as a member of this Parliament, had the feeling that the European Commission, the Commissioner, and in particular the Director-General for Fisheries were acting as if they were ashamed of the sector and even of those Member States that they were called upon to represent in this negotiation.
We all knew from the start that it was a difficult negotiation.
Time has taught us that this could turn from being difficult to being impossible.
Because contact cannot begin by turning our back on the demands of the sector and agreeing to Moroccan demands without any discussions.
The Commission sent signals, not to the negotiators of the neighbouring country, but to European fishermen: too many cephalopod trawlers, a fleet with excess capacity, mixed enterprises, the need to negotiate by segments of the fleet, a ban on mentioning other types of trade and, of course, silence.
Who does this silence benefit?
Does it benefit Parliament, which is accountable to the citizens of the European Union?
Does it benefit a sector which, more enterprising than the negotiators themselves, is going to Morocco and seeing that what is impossible for Brussels is possible for them: speaking directly to the Moroccans, establishing close contacts, principles of trade, industrial and fisheries agreements?
Does it benefit the Directorate General of Fisheries which, with all the Community apparatus at its feet, still thinks that our fishermen are the bad guys and wonders why they do not do something else?
We are left, Commissioner, not with the sentiment, but with the certainty that the sector would by itself have been capable of reaching an agreement which the Commission has still not reached today.
This sentiment does not sit square with negotiations with a country that has an association agreement with the European Union and in whose development we are involved.
And it fits in even less with a European Union that feels able to negotiate the accession of 13 new Member States.
The Moroccan Government is requesting privileged relations with the European Union.
It is right to do so and we should feel proud of this.
We are the main importers of Moroccan fisheries, agricultural and industrial products.
Moroccan agriculture enjoys special treatment when exporting to Europe.
At each negotiation of fisheries agreements, when these were seasonal, Morocco systematically obtained permanent agricultural concessions.
We could say that, eleven months after the docking, we are still paying for the previous agreement and the one before that.
The European Union wants to continue its association with Morocco in the field of fisheries because we are convinced that a cooperation to the advantage of both parties is possible, for the same reasons that make the European Union the largest investor in Morocco.
The first, the second and the third.
Or that thousands of young Moroccans study at Spanish or French universities.
Or that Morocco benefits from substantial European aid.
Or that we share our Mediterranean policy with Morocco.
If employment is truly one of the European Union' s priorities for action, an economic sector such as fisheries cannot continue to be sidelined.
At least 40 000 direct or indirect jobs in the European Union depend on this agreement, in areas with no possibility of conversion.
We are not dealing in intangibles .
The Commission is well aware of the importance of fisheries agreements for certain regions that are highly dependent on this activity: European regions of Denmark, Ireland, Scotland, Andalusia, Portugal and, Galicia, with extremely high unemployment rates and no industrial activity, that have exchanged their potential competitiveness for a marginal activity that the Commission seems to want to marginalise still further - and I am sorry to be so harsh.
For these regions, the last return of the fleet will, in the absence of any other alternative, constitute a fatal blow from which they will find it difficult to recover.
The European institutions must ensure that citizens and fishermen do not see Europe as a panacea, but as a suitable framework for the defence of their interests.
Mr President, Commissioner, the fisheries agreements play a very important role in the fisheries sector.
The agreements with third countries have very great significance for the European Union and especially for those regions with large fishing harbours.
I am thinking here of employment in the sector.
I am thinking also of the many subsidiary businesses and service trades which are wholly or partially dependent upon fisheries.
By means of the fisheries agreements, the European Union is able to engage in fishing operations and exchange fishing rights with third countries.
Those of us in the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party therefore support the fact that the EU' s fisheries policy embraces these many agreements with third countries.
The negotiations concerning a new agreement between the EU and Morocco have made slow progress.
They have been under way since the agreement expired on 30 November 1999, and the European Union has paid compensation to the Spanish and Portuguese ship owners and fishermen.
Commissioner Fischler has stated that this monologue cannot continue.
I very much agree with the Commissioner about this.
The fishermen in particular cannot be blamed for not understanding the situation and for being very disappointed about the fact that the negotiations concerning the Morocco agreement have dragged on.
Those of us in the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party are in favour of as big an effort as possible now being made to bring the long-winded negotiation procedure to a conclusion.
We therefore support the wording of the motion for a Resolution from the Committee on Fisheries.
We nonetheless propose an amendment to the paragraph concerning the arrangements designed to mitigate the effects of a failure to renew the fisheries agreement with Morocco. We propose adding the words: 'which are to be co-financed to an appropriate degree by the EU' .
Mr President, we had a similar debate a year ago and the fact that it has taken a year before negotiations even get under way shows how difficult it is becoming to find fish stocks for our massive EU fleets to exploit.
The EU is ever more dependent upon the goodwill of other countries to let us fish.
We knew five years ago this situation would arise.
When Morocco signed the last agreement, it said it did not want another agreement of the same type and it has kept to that position.
In the five years, what has the Community done?
It adopted a multiannual guidance plan which was far weaker than what was recommended by the scientists and the Commission.
The Commission recently highlighted the implications of this. Then it adopted a structural fund, which will continue to pay for new vessels and the enlargement of existing ones, albeit with some controls.
Yet, once again, the Council watered down what the Commission had bravely proposed.
Consequently we are left with a problem of excess capacity and dwindling fish stocks.
There will need to be further cuts in TACs this Christmas.
The Commission is forced to look further and further afield to find fish.
The Moroccan case is a special situation in that many of the vessels involved are relatively small and fishing close to home.
We agree that the lack of this agreement has had a severe impact.
But while we have plenty of vessels that cannot find fish in European waters, or even in areas where they have traditionally fished, at the same time we have some businessmen, or even business conglomerates, in northern European countries that are building enormous new vessels, which will be forced to depend on fishing far away from Europe.
Given the difficulties in accommodating these vessels in the normal agreements, their owners are making private agreements with the governments of third countries.
Since these are private agreements with no Community involvement, there is no transparency, no access to information, no public accountability.
This is a very serious situation.
Who is to control these vessels?
I would like the Commissioner to give us a detailed account of its activities and their impact.
We will support the resolution, but we have to make it clear that nobody has any given right to exploit the resources of another country if it does not so wish.
That should be taken into account.
We must look at solving our own problem here.
Mr President, I think it would be constructive if a new fisheries agreement with Morocco could be concluded, but I nonetheless think that there are major weaknesses in the text of the Resolution which is now being proposed.
This especially applies to paragraphs 3 and 4, in which it is assumed as a matter of course that the EU should be allowed - in fact, be almost entitled - to fish in Moroccan waters.
There is no such self-evident right. Rather, it is a question of negotiating with another nation.
One can imagine how it would be received if Morocco were to make similar demands to be allowed to fish in EU waters and saw itself as being entitled to do so as a matter of course.
Nor do I think it goes without saying that the EU should finance compensation for fishermen who have fished in waters outside the European Union.
If the EU' s fisheries policy as a whole is looked at, and not just this agreement, a large proportion of the fishing done by EU fishing fleets outside the European Union is unsustainable in the longer term, seen from ecological and resource management perspectives.
Fundamental changes are needed so that there is a reduction in global fishing and so that a smaller proportion of the fisheries budget is used for agreements with third countries.
It is, of course, mostly Spanish and Portuguese boats which fish in Moroccan waters, but boats from northern Europe fish there too. For example, a number of Swedish boats have fished off Morocco.
I was reading in a Swedish fishing trade journal about how one of these boats lands its catch in El Aaiún, described as a Moroccan harbour.
El Aaiún is not, however, situated in Morocco but in Western Sahara, which is occupied by Morocco.
I find it odd that boats fishing in terms of the EU' s quota are able to land their catches in an occupied country.
I should like to ask the Commission whether these matters are being discussed in the negotiations with Morocco.
What approach is adopted towards Western Sahara' s fishing waters?
And how is it possible to land catches in an occupied country under this agreement?
Mr President, we are debating the third agreement with Morocco, which above all concerns French and Portuguese fishermen, who make up the bulk of the fleet, even though a small number of French and Swedish fishermen are also concerned.
It is clear that, together with Morocco, Mauritania a little further to the south, and Senegal, we are dealing with some of the richest fishing regions in the world.
With the second agreement, things were very clear.
Our Moroccan friends and I were in no doubt that this was going to be the final agreement.
Now we have reached the moment of truth for all concerned, first of all for Morocco, which has a right to permanent sovereignty over its natural resources.
But that is not what I heard just now, when talk was of fishing off the coast of an occupied territory, the Western Sahara in this case, which will be of great assistance to us during the negotiations.
The Moroccans have the right to sustainable development and to a major small-scale industry, just as they have the right to create a food industry based on their fisheries and their fish.
On the Spanish and Portuguese side, I understand they are invoking a certain historic right.
The Spaniards have put forward the case of an established practice and presence, and of an economic and human problem affecting 20 000 people who work in the fisheries and supporting industries.
I understand all that.
And on the European side, we have the Euro-Mediterranean partnership, which is being put to the test.
In fact, all our fishing agreements are being called into question not just those with Morocco, as there is also Mauritania and soon there will be Guinea among others to consider.
As for our Socialist Members, what a delight!
Champions of generosity and of the third world, they are discovering what Chairman Mao called 'the difference between antagonistic and non-antagonistic contradictions' .
They have to reconcile defending jobs with their universalist and globalist convictions, which are being put to the test.
It is actually easier to defend the suburbs than it is to defend Morocco.
So do we really need a third-generation agreement with mixed enterprises involving a significant return for Morocco and privileged relations?
I think we should first of all pay a fair price for the resource.
By paying one franc, or less than one euro, for a litre for oil, we have acquired bad habits as far as oil and for that matter, cocoa and the other natural resources are concerned.
But we must also understand that nothing lasts forever, not even fish stocks.
Morocco is a great nation, but it also has major demographic and economic problems.
His Majesty, King Hassan II, is no longer there.
Let us add, in conclusion, the problem of their natural and historic province, the Western Sahara, which has not been completely resolved.
Today, Morocco is faced with factory ships which are coming to pillage its natural resources, and which the small vessels and small Moroccan industries are in no position to resist.
There comes a time in life when we must learn to give in.
This must not stop us from protecting our own resources.
I am thinking of the tree growers and the market gardeners that we have sold out and also of the interests of southern Europe.
To the Spanish and Portuguese Members of the House, I would say that in life everything has to come to an end, even fisheries agreements with the third world.
Mr President, I think the most important thing at the moment is that for almost a year we have been starting to see the light at the end of the tunnel and that in three days time - next Monday -, we will know what to expect, whether the fisheries cooperation with Morocco will continue and what type of cooperation this will be.
This House has been quite rightly criticised along with the Commission regarding the agreement with Morocco, which from the outset has been addressed with tremendous hesitation and naivety.
It has taken eleven months to arrive at the inflexible positions that we have today and the meeting on the 30th, and in this respect we should value the latest measures from Commissioner Fischler, the results of his trip to Morocco on the 26th of last month and the high level meetings that took place, including the one with the King himself.
From this trip we can deduce that the meeting on the 30th will not just be one more and that finally, a Moroccan delegation will be present in Brussels with negotiating and decision-making powers.
At least, that is what we can hope for at the moment, and from this alone we can be confident that fisheries relations with Morocco will be re-established as soon as possible and in the best possible conditions for both parties, because a fisheries scenario for southern Europe is unthinkable without satisfactory relations between both sides of the Mediterranean, while the needless sacrificing of a fleet that has contributed so much to the development of fishing in Morocco is unthinkable too.
The resolution upon which we are preparing to vote does not, and cannot, contain anything new, since it is being voted on just three days before a key date for negotiations.
As this key date is so close, I believe that we must be extremely careful with what is drawn up.
There is one point in the resolution that has been interpreted in very different ways, some of which are truly ridiculous and false and have been published in certain sectors of the media.
I am therefore particularly keen to make it clear that if there is anything that sets the PPE-DE Group apart, it is not only in supporting, defending and fostering fisheries agreements, but also in firmly promoting their extension.
However, in no way can this mean that the PPE-DE Group is opposed to private fisheries agreements, simply because opposing them would mean condemning half of the Community fleet.
I would very much like to know if anyone is really opposed to this solution, and how, and on what grounds, this will be explained to the fishing sector.
I believe we are here to clear the way for the future of Community fishing, not to block it.
Private agreements - of which there are many in the Member States and with many third countries - have yielded excellent results, both in maintaining Community employment and in providing fisheries products to the European Union.
For example, we only need look at the case of Namibia, South Africa, Argentina, Chile, Brazil, Ecuador, Iceland, Mauritania, Morocco itself and many others.
Furthermore, when we complain day after day about the fact that negotiations seem to be falling by the wayside, both the existing agreements and new ones, and the lack of interest that both the Commission and sections of the Council seem to be displaying - and here we have the recent cases of Angola, Cape Verde and Kiribati -, it is quite simply suicidal to block a path which is a solid base for the fisheries activities of the Community fleet, and could be even more so in the future.
The two approaches are therefore completely justifiable, as both are based on the fundamental aim of conserving resources.
We are therefore defending the responsibility that lies with us in the bilateral agreements and in private agreements, where the activity of the fleet is regulated - and will be even more so in future - by regional fisheries organisations such as ICCAT, NAFO and Camelar.
I have nothing more to say, Mr President, except to express my hopes for the best before the meeting on the 30th.
Mr President, the absence of Mr Fischler, which is justified, as the chair of the Committee on Fisheries made clear earlier, prevents me from going into too much detail.
However, I would like to convey a few brief messages to the Commission, which is worthily represented today by Commissioner Busquin.
The first message is the Commission' s inability to renew the most important fisheries agreement that the European Union had.
I believe that this fact should be noted and made clear and doubts raised as to whether the Commission is capable of negotiating international agreements, especially having heard President Prodi request an international remit for the Commission.
Secondly, I am concerned about Mr Busquin' s comment regarding support for developing the fishing capacity of Morocco.
We are talking about a territory that does not belong to Morocco, but that is being administrated by Morocco.
If we help Morocco to over-exploit this territory, which is awaiting a UN-supervised referendum, if we develop a Moroccan fishing fleet to exploit the fish in this territory, what will happen when this territory becomes self-governing and what will we do with the Moroccan fleet?
Thirdly, since the fisheries agreement came to an end, Community and non-Community fleets that are not subject to the control of either the Commission or the Member States have continued to exploit the Saharan fishing grounds, in particular a substantial Dutch fleet.
What measures does the Commission intend to take to prevent at least the Community fleets from continuing to over-exploit these resources?
Fourthly, as Mrs Miguélez emphasised, when the previous fisheries agreements were signed, the European Union made significant concessions to Morocco on all points.
Last year, Morocco withdrew from the negotiating table and, like a good player who has won, ended up with all the cards and did not forfeit a single concession.
Is the European Union going to continue making concessions, if Morocco does not show the slightest desire to relieve the situation?
And finally, the Commissioner has spoken of the Commission' s measures to help the fisheries sector directly affected.
But the fisheries sector is only part of the activity generated by fishing.
At the moment, various Spanish regions, the Canaries, Andalusia and Galicia, and some Portuguese regions, are directly affected by the cessation of fishing activities.
This means the end of shore-based activities, boat repairs, the provisioning of vessels, canning factories and oil factories, which is to say that a whole economic sector is currently paralysed as a result of this.
My question to the Commission is this: if an agreement is not reached with Morocco, or if this agreement is concluded under the terms indicated by the Commission, an agreement that stimulates Moroccan production, is the Commission planning to adopt structural measures to compensate for the losses that will occur in the regions affected.
Mr President, I rise to speak in order to express our support for a resolution with which my Group and I, as Member for Galicia, agree.
However, after a wasted year, and at a time when we are trying to put budgetary appropriations that were earmarked for the agreement under other headings, I must also express my deep suspicion about the Commission's commitment to protecting the legitimate interests of the shipowners and fishermen affected, and state my scepticism about the real will of the Union and of many Member States, amongst them Spain, to negotiate the agreement in the "general field of political and economic relations between Morocco and the European Union" as we propose in the resolution.
I nevertheless hope, of course, that I am mistaken and that the treaty will finally be signed without further delay.
Mr President, this is not the first time that the right to fish in Moroccan and Saharan waters has been an item on Parliament' s agenda.
Spain and Portugal took it for granted that Morocco was obliged to allow European fishermen to fish in its waters, and it was a shock when this came to an end last year.
I can well understand why, because this type of fishing was a source of revenue and employment for what is by European standards a poor region.
In the past, it was deemed quite natural for the economy to be prized more highly than the protection of the natural balance, and for the poorest people in Europe to try and pinch a few crumbs from Europe' s domination over the third world.
We have now reached the stage where parts of the oceans are being fished to the point of exhaustion, and stocks of certain types of fish have declined to such an extent that they are at risk of extinction.
Morocco has every right to afford its waters sustainable protection against over-fishing.
Europe cannot lay claim to rights in other parts of the world any longer.
In future, we will have to learn to live without fishing concessions bequeathed to us by our colonial past.
The proposed resolution will not lead to the restoration of fishing rights, but, at best, to Spain and Portugal having a more solid claim to compensation subsidies.
I would urge the Commission not to persist in bringing pressure to bear on Morocco, and to be more understanding of Morocco' s complaints.
Incidentally, I agree with Mrs McKenna that the Spanish and Portuguese fishermen are not the only villains of the piece.
The fishermen in the North, including my country, the Netherlands, must reduce their catches too.
Mr President, Commissioner, the European Union has had fishing agreements with Morocco since 1992.
The agreement currently in force expired at the end of November last year.
Under this agreement, around 500 boats from the European Union, 50 of which are Portuguese, have had access to Moroccan waters at an annual cost of around EUR 125 million.
As we imagined, the difficulties in negotiating with the Moroccan authorities have been considerable.
Morocco values its fishing resources very highly and it is constantly besieged by the great international fishing powers such as Japan, South Korea, and Russia to allow them to fish even more in its waters.
It should also be pointed out at this juncture that the fishing agreement with Morocco is part of a broader partnership and cooperation framework under which the European Union also grants Morocco considerable trade concessions and considerable support for its development.
I wish to highlight four points in this speech.
Firstly, it must be emphasised that the fishing agreement with Morocco is by far the European Union' s most important agreement, representing more than 30% of all catches by the Community fleet in third-country waters.
The 30 000 jobs directly or indirectly dependent on this agreement may seem few in terms of the European Union as a whole, but because they are concentrated in small fishing communities, mainly on the Spanish and Portuguese coasts, where there is no tradition or potential for economic conversion, the loss of these jobs would spell disaster.
Secondly, I must stress, with considerable bitterness, the lack of openness on the part of the Moroccan authorities involved in the negotiations.
I do not understand their position for two reasons.
Firstly, in the meantime they have been granting private licences to various shipowners from other countries, which contradicts their argument that their difficulties in negotiating with the European Union are to do with the need to conserve fish stocks.
Secondly, Morocco' s inflexibility is also incomprehensible given our willingness to open up our markets to Moroccan products, and the aid that has been provided under the general cooperation agreement with Morocco.
Another aspect that I wish to highlight is the fact that at the end of this month, temporary aid paid to fishermen and shipowners in compensation for this year of inactivity comes to an end.
This situation is unsustainable, since they would all rather work than receive aid.
The Commission and the Council of Ministers must shoulder their responsibilities, which involves not merely extending aid until the situation is resolved, but also reviewing the general framework for cooperation with Morocco in the event that this situation drags on.
Finally, as the body responsible for conducting the negotiations, the Commission must keep Parliament properly informed about what is going on, since we find the current situation quite incomprehensible.
Equally incomprehensible is the passivity of the Fisheries Council.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, "blue" Europe, as it is metaphorically called, is in crisis.
Our seas are being abused, our fish stocks are dwindling, and our fishermen, who are forced to remain idle, are finding it hard to accept the cruel fate that threatens the survival of a traditional activity and a particular way of life.
On Tuesday, we debated in this Chamber the alarming breach in the Irish Sea of the ban on fishing for cod, that dish that is the very essence, by the way, of Portuguese cuisine.
Today we are debating a fisheries agreement with Morocco.
We are about to see another harsh blow dealt to fishing in the European Union.
I say in the European Union and not just in two of its constituent parts, as some Members have insinuated: European solidarity must be more than empty words or just a one-dimensional idea that simply evaporates when the problems happen to be concentrated chiefly in Portugal and Spain...
Unfortunately, the Commission was not able to reach new agreements in the negotiations with Morocco held before the expiry of the fisheries agreement on 30 November 1999.
Almost a year later, it seems that we are back to square one.
The little information that is available is unclear, despite the fact that negotiations have continued - or so we are told - with various complicated ups and downs.
In spite of everything, the Commissioner has given us a guarantee today that negotiations will reopen next week and that progress is being made.
He said this in very vague terms.
He told us that there is a possibility of achieving a balanced partnership with Morocco.
Is this true, or is he saying what he thinks we want to hear?
Scepticism and confusion are widespread and legitimate.
Does the European Union then not have sufficient weight and influence to convince its partner, Morocco, of the mutual advantages of signing the new agreement?
What is actually going on here?
Is the problem the rather unhelpful attitude of the Moroccan Government, which prefers to negotiate with companies on an individual basis, instead of negotiating with the European Union, with which it shares important and long-standing interests in several areas?
Has the European Union lost all its diplomatic and economic influence?
I think not!
My view is that the European Union has underestimated the problem.
What happens if the agreement fails?
What attitude will the Council and the Commission adopt?
Surely it will not be to wash their hands of the matter, given that they are the institutions with the power and the responsibility for conducting these negotiations.
Lastly, in the undesirable event that negotiations should fail, the Union has a political and moral duty to support the fishermen and shipowners with a reasonable amount of aid that will ensure that they have the means to live.
That is the minimum requirement, but by itself it is not enough.
The Union must prepare a programme for conversion of activities carried out by the operators affected, in order to give them a stable future.
Switching this problem to the Structural Funds and to the Member States would mean discrediting the Union in the eyes not only of those affected, but of the general public too.
Mr President, Commissioner, I am not going to repeat what has been said this morning in this plenary sitting and has been being said for almost a year.
Ladies and gentlemen, the truth is that the Community fleets in Andalusia, the Canaries, Galicia and Portugal are in dock due to the lack of a fisheries agreement.
Nor do I want to blame the Commission again for its lack of success in the negotiations or for the delay in beginning to put pressure on Morocco.
This has already been done.
This Andalusian MEP has been negotiating and proposing initiatives for a year in corridors, in offices, in the Committee on Fisheries and in the hearings with the Commissioner so that the highly specific idiosyncrasies of the Andalusian fishing fleet working in Morocco would be taken into account.
We need a practical fisheries agreement.
We do not want an agreement in which the interests of this large coastal fishing fleet are not reflected.
Extremely important fishing towns in the south Atlantic zone - Huelva and Cadiz - and the southern Mediterranean - Malaga, Granada and Almeria - depend on this agreement.
They have no alternative to fishing.
Furthermore, the social repercussions of this fleet lying in dock are extremely serious and are, in some cases, related to drug cultivation and trafficking by the Kingdom of Morocco.
I will end by saying that if the European Union was currently negotiating with the real owners of the Saharan shoals, the Saharan people, we would already have a valid agreement and we would not be being subjected to blackmail by the Alaouite Kingdom as a result of which failure to reach an agreement, or the sealing of an ineffective agreement, would have serious repercussions on the special relationship between Morocco and the European Union.
Mr President, everyone knows that Jean Monnet was one of the founding fathers of the EU.
He used to tell a joke about the Norwegians.
The joke was that the Norwegians always talk about fish.
It is a bad joke.
It is as bad as Jean Monnet' s idea regarding how the European Union should develop.
According to him, the EU should always have a management group, by which he probably meant Germany and France.
It would have meant there would not have been democratic equality among the countries in the EU.
But let me turn now to the question of fish.
I would defend Norway, which is not a member of the EU, because the EU wants to bring Norway' s resources of fish under the auspices of the Community without giving it anything in their place other than Jean Monnet' s political management group.
I would also defend Morocco against the fishermen plunderers of the EU countries.
The world' s seas are now being emptied of its fish protein in a way that resembles plundering.
We must protect the world' s fish stocks.
We have to resolve the overcapacity situation in the EU fisheries industry.
Let people fish with EU money in EU waters only!
Mr President, a Czech bishop, Bishop Koukl, to whom I am very close, has a rather nice saying: "Loving thy neighbour would be so simple if only one' s neighbour were not right on one' s doorstep" .
This saying aptly describes relations between numerous neighbouring countries.
Historically, it is neighbours that seem to have so much trouble with each other and the idea of the European Union is to resolve problematic relations with neighbours.
I should like here to take my hat off to Spanish foreign policy.
Spain has done a magnificent job in turning round the difficult neighbourly relations which Europe and North Africa and Spain and Morocco have suffered during the course of history.
I had the honour of attending the twentieth jubilee of former King Hassan of Morocco at the beginning of the 1980s, while I was working as a journalist.
I watched from the front row, as it were. It was an impressive sight when the Spanish king came to Marrakech and drove with the Moroccan king in an open car through streets lined with over a million people.
It reminded me of scenes from our history and from my childhood, when Konrad Adenauer and Charles De Gaulle drove through German towns in exactly the same way, demonstrating that the problems between the two neighbours had been overcome and that France and Germany would together form the core of European integration.
Spain and Morocco have a similar opportunity to become the core of integration in the Mediterranean.
I think that Spain and Morocco have done a great deal in order to avoid what many see as unavoidable, namely the clash of civilisations, the conflict when different cultures collide.
Spain has developed a marvellous bridging function here, as has Portugal, and I think that we should look at this fisheries agreement in this light.
The Spanish and Portuguese fishermen deserve our undivided support.
This is not a local phenomenon; these are European fishermen and even though we are not perhaps directly affected, we must fight their corner.
In doing so, however, we must not lose sight of the fact that relations between the European Union and the transit countries around our borders, and I am thinking in particular here of North Africa, Turkey and Russia, which act as bridges on the borders of the European Union to other parts of the world and to other countries - that these countries deserve our particular support.
That is why we need to forge close economic and political relations with Morocco as quickly as possible, while at the same time defending our European fisheries interests.
That is why I am in favour of everything that has been said here about forcing the agreement.
However, I should like expressly to criticise the anti-Moroccan undertones that have also been heard in this debate because they do nothing to help neighbourly relations and because they do nothing to help the fisheries agreement.
We must be critical and open, but we must say to the Moroccans that we are keen to forge a close and permanent partnership with Morocco and to stabilise Morocco's position in the Mediterranean, while at the same time safeguarding our own interests.
I think that if we manage to persuade Morocco to take a European outlook, then Morocco will do what it should have done long ago, i.e. it will discuss the question of natural resources, of common resources with us and will stop giving preference to ships from third countries.
Mr President, the tender fruit negotiation will be opened up in three days' time, and we will then know if it is ripe or green, or sufficiently ripe for us all to feel calm and for both the parties concerned, the European Union and Morocco, to start sounding out methods of cooperation and agreements in a manner that is flexible, Commissioner, but also serious and rigorous, so that the Community fishing fleet may recommence its activities in those waters.
As a Spanish and Andalusian MEP, I assert the rights of thousands of Andalusian and Spanish families to maintain and defend their jobs, which have been endangered for almost a year, and for us also to defend these jobs here in Parliament.
But I would also like to appeal to the intelligence of the Kingdom of Morocco, which time and again has knocked on the door of the European Union and this Parliament in search of understanding and assistance in resolving its economic, social and political problems, of flexible cooperation and, I emphasise, also seriously, of arriving at an agreement that satisfies both parties.
Commissioner, agriculture, immigration - a field with regard to which we approved a new budgetary line yesterday for assistance to Morocco -, industry and the economy form part of the set of mutual relations between Morocco and the European Union.
It would be senseless to exclude fisheries from this and, precisely, the association agreement that links us to Morocco consists of not excluding any aspect that affects our interests, as the alternative would be to dull the impetus with which the European Union wants to, and can, promote the wholesale development of this country.
This is the clear message which should also be sent to the Moroccans.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I would simply like to add that there are clearly agreements between the two parties to establish a timetable for negotiations and that Morocco has spent months preparing its five-year plan.
Following Mr Fischler' s visit to Rabat on 18 May 2000, negotiations entered a new, more active, phase with a meeting on 25 July in Rabat of the Directors-General of Fisheries, another meeting on 28 and 29 September in Brussels and, finally, Mr Fischler' s meeting on 16 October with the Prime Minister and with His Majesty, Mohamed VI of Morocco.
Mr Fischler, may I add, reported back to the Commission on his discussion.
He had gained a favourable impression from his meeting, which augurs well for the negotiations, due to start on 30 October, being conducted in a constructive spirit.
That is why the Commission is working on the basis of a new partnership aimed at an interesting development between the two parties involving, on the one hand, the development of the entire Moroccan fishing industry, the fleet, aquaculture, commercial processing and research and, on the other, providing European fishermen with fishing opportunities.
I think we must therefore wait for the results of the meetings of 30 October.
Mr Fischler will, of course, inform the European Parliament of these results immediately and I hope, as you all do, that the negotiations will be productive and will lead to the establishment of a fruitful association between Morocco and the European Union.
As regards the appropriate measures to be taken if the agreement does not succeed, the Commission is bearing these in mind but, as you well understand, we think and we hope that it will be possible for the negotiations to move forward on Monday in a more decisive way.
These are the replies that Mr Fischler could have made in my place and I will not fail to convey to him everything you have said.
Mr President, I would like to thank my friends and hope that they are listening carefully to my explanation of vote, the contents of which are extremely serious even it may not appear so on the surface.
I am very familiar with the problems of Spanish and Portuguese fishermen, problems which are shared by fishermen in Sicily.
However, a few days ago, I discovered that a when a Moroccan fish bumped into a Spanish fish in the Mediterranean one day, he remarked (in his own language, of course), "I have heard that Mr Fatuzzo is fighting so that we fish will be able to become pensioners too" .
This gives me great pleasure, but I have another desire: I am a Moroccan fish and I would like to be caught by a Moroccan fisherman, not a Spanish fisherman.
I have established a trade union.
The other fish, the Spanish one, says: 'I would like to be caught by a Moroccan fisherman, not a Spanish one ...
(The President cut the speaker off)
I would remind the honourable Member that the order of business allows one minute's speaking time and that applies to all honourable Members.
Nonetheless, thank you for your most interesting contribution.
Rights of language teachers
The next item is the oral question to the Commission (B5-0541/00) by Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market on the rights of language teachers: maintenance of the rule of law.
Mr Wieland has five minutes' speaking time on behalf of Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi.
Mr President, Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi, the chairman of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market has been unexpectedly called away and has asked me to stand in for her.
I therefore only had a short time to prepare to present the position of the Committee on Legal Affairs.
What is at issue here?
It is not in fact language teachers.
Many will perhaps say that the issue is far too detailed and far too complicated.
But it is not about language teachers; it is all about an example, in this case about a citizens' Europe.
It is about a story that was first brought before the European Court of Justice in 1989.
An almost 12-year old story full of false hopes, stalling tactics, hopes and personal need, about placatory measures for those involved and tough defence of old rights against citizens seeking no more than their due.
Let us name names, to coin a phrase: it is about the case of the Union citizens Allué and Coonan versus the University of Venice, it is about the case of the Union citizen Allué again versus the University of Venice and it is about the case of the Union citizen David Petri versus the University of Verona.
The European Court of Justice returned a clear verdict.
The European Court of Justice handed down three judgements vindicating these citizens who, before the first of these judgments, were employed to lecture in Italian universities as lettori.
The tenet of these judgments is unequivocal: the rights of the persons affected to the free movement of labour and the right not to be discriminated against on grounds of nationality had been violated in that Italy did not offer the lettori the same terms of employment and job security as Italian nationals lecturing at a similar level in universities.
Unfortunately, nothing was settled after the first judgement.
The amendments made to the law in its wake in 1995 are still unable to guarantee full protection of the rights of lettori lecturing in universities. In the end even the ombudsman backed these citizens.
I am not sure if this play on words works in the other languages.
In German we say, "having a right is one thing, being allowed to exercise it is another" .
The Committee on Legal Affairs has formulated a clear position here and thrown its weight behind the Union citizens whose rights have been restricted.
Now a number of proposed amendments have been tabled which, to put it mildly, I find somewhat irritating.
I only intend to refer to two examples which are an attempt to improve or, in one case, to reverse Parliament's position at the eleventh hour: the original recital H proposed by the Committee on Legal Affairs reads: "Whereas the persons affected, who are Union citizens, have suffered losses, stress and uncertainty over this period of several years, as the result of being involved in protracted and repetitive litigation in hundreds of court proceedings over 12 years and have had their legitimate expectation of being able to exercise their profession with reasonable career prospects has been dashed" .
Now an amendment has been tabled, proposed Amendment No 8, which deletes a few words and adds a few, thereby not only watering down but almost reversing the meaning.
The text would then read: "Whereas the persons affected, who are Union citizens, have been involved in protracted and repetitive litigation and have seen their legitimate expectations dashed."
It is not only in German that this makes a clear difference.
But now to what is, in my view, a much more serious process. Proposed Amendment No 9 suggests that "Whereas the Italian government takes the view that it has fully satisfied its obligations vis-à-vis the lettori pursuant to Law 236/95, which complies with the principles of the Treaty" .
Apart from the fact that this was not discussed in the Committee on Legal Affairs, we would be maintaining here that the legal basis in Italian law corresponds to the principles of the Treaty and yet the Court of Justice said exactly the opposite!
I consider this action to be dubious.
If we take the view that these practices are legally acceptable and politically desirable then, as legislators, we should go ahead and change the principles, but if this is an attempt to use Parliament to conceal a position, then all I have to say is that the PPE wants no part of it!
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the case of non-Italian foreign language assistants in Italian universities is well known in the Commission and in most European institutions.
This affair has been ongoing for more than a decade and, as a result of intervention on the part of the European institutions, in particular the Commission, the situation of the assistants has improved.
As you know, the issue is very complex and concerns some seven hundred people working in more than 25 Italian universities.
Throughout this decade, the Commission has worked assiduously to resolve the problem of foreign language assistants in Italy in respect of the free movement of workers, which is guaranteed by the Treaty.
As you have highlighted, the Court of Justice has already delivered three judgments concerning language assistants and, with the case pending in Luxembourg, the Commission has taken action aimed at further improving the situation.
More particularly, following the decisions of the Court of Justice of 1989 and 1993 - the Allué case - which ruled that the limitations on the duration of employment contracts of foreign-language assistants imposed by the Italian government were discriminatory, the Commission took a number of steps.
It initiated an infringement procedure, which was dropped in 1995 following an Italian law bringing the legislation into line with the Court ruling.
As regards the language assistants' subsequent claims concerning their acquired rights, the Commission launched another infringement procedure on the grounds that, in a certain number of Italian universities, the assistants' acquired rights were not being duly safeguarded.
In fact, the Commission mobilised a lot of its resources in order to examine this case.
In fact, the services of the Commission put together hundreds of pages of documentation on specific cases in a number of universities.
We exchanged a great deal of correspondence with the players concerned and went to a great deal of trouble to select from among piles of irrelevant documents the elements that proved conclusively that the former lettori had in fact been the victims of discrimination by certain Italian universities in respect of their financial acquired rights such as salaries and contributions to pension schemes.
In July 1999, the Commission brought this infringement procedure before the Court of Justice.
It is now waiting for the Court to rule on this new infringement and on this new procedure, which was initiated by the Commission.
The assistants not only invoked the lack of protection of their acquired rights, they also deplored the new legal system set up by the Italian legislation of 1995.
They believed that the Italian state should have integrated them into the category of members of the academic teaching staff or, failing that, it should have created a specific category for them among the teaching staff.
In the opinion of the assistants, this right would follow directly from the right of workers to free movement.
On this point, however, the Commission was not in agreement with the assistants.
It is our view that freedom of movement enables European citizens not to be the victims of discrimination under national systems of law.
It does not give them the right to a special legal status.
Each Member State is fully within its right to establish the provisions governing its own public service.
Community legislation cannot prevent Italy from amending the provisions governing the status of former lettori and from transforming them into linguistic experts with partially different attributions.
If the Italian legal system is reformed and modified, as it was in respect of academic teaching staff, we do not think that the Commission can intervene given that every European citizen has equal access to all categories of professions.
Indeed, any European citizen may become a permanent member of the teaching body by taking part in the appropriate concorso.
Mr President, I would just like to ask the Members to reflect a moment.
If the matter is a legal one, we should proceed along legal avenues and the Court should pass judgment; those who need to appeal should appeal and those who demand justice must have it.
If the matter is of a political nature - and therefore a matter for Parliament - it is a pity that we do not approach matters of this kind with due caution.
I fully appreciate the Commission's position and, indeed, as Parliament, we must be very careful.
I am not defending my government out of solidarity - it is not my government, I belong to an opposition party - but I am trying to clarify the matter.
We make every endeavour to ensure that the citizens enjoy the same rights in all the States, but they also have to respect and face up to the same responsibilities in all the States.
It is intolerable for European citizens to have some sort of privileged access in a State other than their own and not to have to undergo the same tests and bear the same burdens as the citizens of that country, in the case in the point the citizens of Italy.
In the European Union, education and teaching is structured according to the principle of subsidiarity, with the result that the laws of the Member States differ.
Under Italian law, you do not become a university lecturer automatically by virtue of experience, you have to pass a public examination.
Therefore, until we manage to harmonise the laws - which we hope to do - respect for the principle of subsidiarity for the moment means that it is impossible on the grounds of discrimination to do away with something which is in all probability a request for a privilege.
I repeat: there must be the same rights but also the same responsibilities for all.
Otherwise, this problem, which is political, not legal in nature, will arise again and could occur in other States of the European Union where laws governing university career paths and education are different from elsewhere.
I therefore advocate caution.
Mr President, I rise to give my voice to this injustice that we have heard about, an injustice, as we have also heard, that has been going on now for 12 years.
It has taken not one, not two but three court cases and it still has not been resolved.
So why are we back here today debating this injustice in this Chamber?
It is because of our failure to resolve the issue that we are back here.
We have to continue to publicise this issue until it is resolved.
What is this injustice?
Mr Wieland started to highlight it when he spoke on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs.
The injustice is about two people doing the same job, working side by side, but on different pay and under different conditions.
If we truly believe in the single market and the free movement of people, that should not happen.
I disagree with my colleague, Mr Lisi, who spoke earlier.
He talked about these people wanting a "privileged" position.
They are not asking for a privileged position, they are just asking for the same.
Until they get the same as their equivalents in Italy this matter will rumble on.
I listened carefully to what Mr Busquin said on behalf of the Commission.
Some people say there is a whiff of hypocrisy from the Commission.
Some even go further and say there is a stench of hypocrisy from the Commission.
I will go as far so to say there is a small smell of hypocrisy coming from the Commission.
If the Commission were truly serious about resolving this issue it would have been resolved years ago.
We can perhaps accept that the previous Commission under Mr Santer was not the best, so that is why it went.
But I have to say we are looking at this Commission: the President of this Commission is fully aware of this case, is fully aware of the facts, and yet nothing has been done to resolve it.
We have to ask why.
That is why this Parliament today is again debating this issue, highlighting this issue, to put it back before the Commission and say: get this sorted out.
Mr President, politicians often have the difficult task of telling constituents that no matter how heartfelt their grievance, or how strong its moral base, there is no legal remedy.
Sometimes they have the even more difficult task of having to admit that because of problems of access to justice or because of the law's own delays, the road to vindicating their legal rights will be long and arduous.
Worst of all, I believe, is having to issue a warning that a court judgment in their favour may just be a set of comforting words and make no real difference in their lives.
Fortunately, in a democratic society this is rare.
The rule of law means just that.
No-one can place him or herself outside its ambit just because of who they are or what they do.
The American jurist, Lon Fuller, warned us that one of the ways in which something can fail to be a legal system is if there is no congruence between legal rules and official action.
In the last eleven years we have seen three European Court of Justice judgments in favour of the lettori.
On 13 September this year the European Ombudsman sustained a complaint by them and a number of individual cases have been upheld in the Italian courts.
I am well aware that the circumstances have not been easy for people on both sides of the argument.
But if in this Parliament the rule of law is important to us, we must ensure that it is upheld.
If in this Parliament we genuinely believe in a citizen's Europe, we must strive to secure one.
As has been said, this is the third time that this issue has come before Parliament in the form of a motion for a resolution.
I hope and trust that there will be no need for it ever to do so again, unless it is to thank all those involved for the fact that effective action has now been taken.
We are a small House because it is a Friday morning but it needs to be noticed and recognised that this is an all-party issue and an all-Union issue.
Members of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market from all over the Union and from all the parties have come together to say that it is no use talking about rights, advocating charters of rights if you do not, in real cases when people's rights are denied, take effective action to get them recognised and to get them enforced, and that is the problem in this case.
I was sorry to see, for example, one of the amendments taking out the reference not only to an appeal to the Ombudsman but the fact that the Ombudsman answered it affirmatively.
That is a critical point because the Ombudsman said that the Commission acted wrongly in failing to communicate with the language lettori the fact that they were changing pleadings on an important and significant article, and the article on which the Commission changed its pleadings is the very point that Commissioner Busquin mentioned.
The point is that the lettori claim the right to continue as teachers, not to be changed into something else.
Nobody disputes that the Italian Republic is fully within its entitlement, in 1995 or at any other time, to say for the future we will not hire people as lettori, we will bring in people for a new kind of appointment.
They can say that to anybody who applies in the future, but they cannot in respect of the past change the rights of people whose rights have upheld by the Court.
I remind the Commission that I hope it will reply to the point that in the Allué case the ruling of the Court is as follows: 'Hereby rules, it is contrary to Article 48(2) of the EEC Treaty for the legislation of a Member State to limit the duration of employment contracts of foreign-language assistants in any event to one year, with the possibility of renewal where in principle no such limit exists with regard to other teachers.'
If that is so, then the people whose representatives are in the gallery today, are entitled to be recognised as teachers in Italian universities of similar standing to those holding ten-year appointments in the university.
We do not say they should be made Italian civil servants. We say Italy should make its law conform with the decision of the Court and give these teachers the right to be such.
Mr President, there is clearly something wrong with the policy governing the appointment of foreign teachers in Italy, if they are only granted temporary appointments as technical administrative employees.
This leaves them in a precarious legal position, and means that they receive lower pay than their Italian colleagues for the same work.
This has already been established by the Court of Justice and the ombudsman.
What is important is whether this came about by unhappy accident, or whether a quite deliberate decision was taken to maintain this distinction on a permanent basis.
I assume that the Italian educational authorities are already fully appraised of the criticism, but the impression I am getting is that this has not convinced them of the need to do things differently from now on.
Even though I am an advocate of national autonomy and the right to diversity, I endorse the motion for a resolution because there must never be discrimination on the basis of nationality.
If we adopt the proposed resolution, will it bring about any changes in the situation, or is there nothing the European Union can do about it at the end of the day?
Is Italy to receive a fine by way of punishment?
Are we going to carry on complaining, with our hands tied, or are other Member States going to follow suit and start discriminating against Italian teachers?
By coincidence, this very afternoon I am off to Italy, a country that I love so much, to lecture about the benefits of the Mediterranean diet, which has been exported so successfully to the rest of the world, and therefore it saddens me all the more to make this speech criticising its government and its rules in this area.
However, some of my British constituents who wish to lecture and reside in Italy are not so fortunate as I am today.
In 1989 foreign lecturers working there won a case before the ECJ requiring their contracts not to be limited to six years.
After the Italian universities had responded by saying that the judgment did not specifically require them to offer open-ended contracts, a second judgment of the Court in 1993 spelt out clearly that the length of the contracts could not be fixed.
The universities responded by downgrading the status of foreign lecturers to support staff and no longer members of the academic teaching staff.
These dismissed lettori, as they are known, took their employers to the Italian Supreme Court, which ruled in their favour and demanded their immediate reinstatement.
The universities ignored the rulings, denying them the rights associated with teaching staff, including the twice-yearly pay rises so generous in the academic system in Italy.
In a Kafkaesque style the universities even went as far as to remove their names from the internal telephone books, the doors and the university websites.
This is quite unacceptable in a modern Europe.
Some of you will be aware of my support for the right of the male descendants of the exiled Italian royal family to return to their homeland.
They are subject to a medieval article in the constitution of Italy which prevents all male descendants of the family from entering Italian territory, in clear violation in my view of the Treaty of Amsterdam.
Shamefully, in this very House the left-wing and Liberal groups have conspired to block the two princes' access to the Court of Justice although a ruling is expected shortly from the Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg.
Governments must understand that if they sign treaties then they must either abrogate them as sovereign states or abide by their terms in a rule of law.
The Italian Government, which comprises left-wing parties who constantly extol the virtues of European laws, rights and treaties, must act soon on both these issues if its commitments to the values for which it claims to stand are not to generate widespread cynicism in other Member States about Italy's commitment to uphold European law.
So far the European Commission has proven unwilling to enforce the Treaties when the number of people affected are few.
In the instance of my motion on the royal family this was even described by the Liberal rapporteur in this House on human rights as an exotic motion of no interest.
Well, I believe that these matters go to the very heart of the fundamental principles of the freedom associated with European law, particularly the freedom of movement, and no exceptions can be made to these principles.
There must be non-discrimination for EU citizens wherever they come from and wherever they want to go to within the Union.
These issues are vital to uphold European freedom and in my view there is no national issue of vital interest to the security of the Italian State which is being threatened by either the royal family or the Italian foreign lecturers.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, the debate on this question, which goes beyond Italy, is a highly interesting and most important debate.
When we refer in recital C of the resolution to the three judgments, which state that the rights of the persons affected under the freedom of movement of labour in the Union and their rights not to be exposed to discrimination on the basis of their nationality were violated by Italy's omissions and when the ombudsman and numerous speakers here confirm this, then the argument of one of the previous speakers, namely that the violation can be justified on the grounds of subsidiarity does not stand up.
When the European Court of Justice finds that European law has been violated, this cannot be countered by invoking the principle of subsidiarity.
The second point is that this is, without doubt, a political debate because it is about the violation of the law.
The legal status of the Treaties cannot be played off against politics; on the contrary, it is our duty, should this happen, to hold a political debate in the House on the violation of the law.
I think that the saying "If you don't take yourself seriously, no-one else will" is most apt here.
When there are three judgments in a case by the European Court of Justice and the country in question still fails to change its conduct, then we must intervene; we must make it public.
We discussed the Charter of Fundamental Rights here in the House a few days ago.
Surely compliance with current law is the very first fundamental right which can be demanded of us?
Surely promoting the community based on law is the basis for the European community of values?
You cannot play one off against the other.
Obviously education still comes under subsidiarity but, within the framework of the Treaties, the freedom of movement of workers and the ban on discrimination apply to everyone, although we - and I in particular, coming as I do from a highly federalist state - support the principle of subsidiarity as a principle of order in our dealings with the European Union and do what we can so that powers are divided as quickly as possible between the levels in Europe in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity.
Italy's conduct in this matter runs counter to the objectives of the Community and runs counter to our desire to increase the mobility and flexibility of workers.
The diversity of cultures, which we see as a fundamental element of Europe, finds expression first and foremost in the diversity of languages.
Anyone who stands up for the diversity of cultures must do what they can so that we can maintain the diversity of languages and learn them everywhere.
We support the internal economic market.
I say that also as a member of the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, Media and Sport: the internal economic market needs the internal educational market.
There are still many fetters and many obstacles to this internal market, as today's debate has shown, and not just in this case.
We should do everything to remove these fetters as quickly as possible.
Mr President, I believe that all the speeches have contributed specific elements to the debate.
Nonetheless, I think that I have already answered a certain number of the points raised.
I would like to recall once again that these mechanisms contain a time factor and that we are talking about facts going back ten years, different aspects of which must be taken into consideration.
As regards the conformity of the Italian system to the decision of the Court in the Allué case, the Commission initiated an infringement procedure, which was dropped in 1995 when Italy adopted the law abolishing this restriction.
Italy then adopted a new text in 1996 eliminating the discriminatory elements that existed before.
But there is a second aspect to the problem: the question of acquired rights.
In this area, we analysed all the processes, as I have already explained and the Commission launched a new infringement procedure against Italy in July 1999.
We are waiting for the European Court of Justice to rule on this aspect of the problem.
There are thus two things, which I would not describe as being different, but which are linked together slightly differently over time.
It is therefore necessary to make a distinction between the two elements.
As regards the equal access of all European citizens to all professional categories, it is clear that each European citizen may become a member of the Italian teaching body by taking part in a competition intended for Italian teachers.
In this context, it can no longer be a question of discrimination.
It is therefore necessary to look at the previous situation, which was manifestly discriminatory.
The Commission did its job in bringing the infringement procedure before the European Court of Justice and the Italian State changed the law.
It is clear that the entire problem of acquired rights still remains unsolved.
We are once again in the middle of an infringement procedure and we hope that the Court of Justice will give its opinion as soon as possible.
The debate is closed.
We shall now proceed to the vote.
Motion for a resolution (B5-0824/2000) on the rights of language teachers: maintenance of the rule of law
After the vote on recital H:
Mr President, I hereby suggest that we insert the word "unconvincingly" between "government" and "claims" in this amendment.
I have no objection to its being drawn to our attention that the Italian Government has made a certain claim, but especially since the Commissioner has disgracefully shown that he perhaps believes the claim, let us put the word "unconvincingly" in or reject this amendment.
Mr President, I will not excuse the Italian government or the Italian courts for condemning many pensioners to a low pension, but in this case I voted against the report because I consider the judgments of the Court of Justice to be erroneous.
The root of the issue is that it is impossible to grant a language assistant, a person who is well versed in English and comes to an Italian medical university to explain to the students what the Italian terms are for heart disease, operation, liver disease, and so forth, to have the same rights, on the basis of their having the same status, as someone who teaches medicine.
Mr President, would you go for treatment to somebody who knows all the surgical terms in Italian, English, French and German, or would you go to a surgeon?
Mr President, I have a great deal of sympathy for language teachers in Italy who do not have Italian nationality.
As a citizen of a very small country, I am a great advocate of the free movement of workers and self-employed people and also of the freedom of establishment.
As an old suffragette, I have spent 40 years on the barricades, fighting against all forms of discrimination, whether based on gender or on nationality.
But the free movement of workers must not result in discrimination against nationals.
Coming from a country whose active population is more than 50% non-Luxembourgeois, foreign residents or people who cross the border every day to work, I know what I am talking about.
In my country, for secondary school teachers we have very strict and very hard recruitment competitions.
We cannot, and I say this as a matter of principle, discriminate against nationals by making access to employment easier for non-nationals.
This said, I hope that our debate will go some way to promoting an equitable solution for language teachers in Italy.
I feel bound to say, however, that we could easily fill up Friday' s agenda, if we were to deal with all existing similar cases of discrimination in this Chamber, especially those based on gender.
(The President cut the speaker off)
Mr President, I am pleased that the Liberal amendments were defeated and that I was therefore able to vote for this report but I would like to query one point made by Mr Busquin.
He said that everyone working in Italian universities has to pass the same exams as Italian teachers have to pass.
I do not see why that should be the case.
We are supposed to have mutual recognition of qualifications across Europe so that you can qualify in your own country and then move to others.
That is a basic issue in Mr Busquin's response which needs to be questioned and I am sorry to see that he has now left the Chamber.
Mr Purvis, that was not a point of order.
Unfortunately, Mr Busquin has already left.
I would advise you to speak to him directly.
Adjournment of the session
I declare the session of the European Parliament adjourned and wish you a pleasant weekend.
(The sitting was closed at 10.56 a.m.)
Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Friday 27 October 2000.
Statement by the President
Madam President, I should like to thank you very much for extending your sympathies and condolences on the occasion of this terrible tragedy which we have just experienced.
Many of these mainly young people boarded the train with the prospect of enjoying themselves, having fun and experiencing something positive, and they instead experienced a terrible and tragic death.
I should like to thank you - I do not know whether anyone else will be speaking about this - on behalf of many Members of this House and, in any case, on behalf of my group and my delegation.
Madam President, may I take this opportunity, since you addressed this matter in such clear and sympathetic terms, to say that for this reason we can dispense with having a topical and urgent debate on this matter.
I would ask you to understand that for this reason we do not really need to have the topical and urgent debate.
Madam President, allow me to thank you very much on behalf of my delegation for your message of sympathy which you sent on behalf of the European Parliament following the catastrophe at Kitzsteinhorn to our President, Dr Klestil, our Chancellor, Wolfgang Schüssel, and thus to all the people of Austria.
Thank you also for having the flags flown at half-mast.
We are united in shock and grief for the 150 people who died and we share in the pain of their relatives.
We extend our deepest sympathies to them.
The great Austrian poet, Rainer Maria Rilke, once wrote that death is great and that we find ourselves in its laughing mouth.
The burning inferno on the funicular railway - a railway which was considered to be one of the safest - which leads to one of the most beautiful areas of the Austrian Alps, makes everything else fade into the background, and the readiness to share pain and grief becomes our only comfort.
I would therefore consider it to be appropriate to commemorate the victims, who did not only come from my country but from many European countries and from overseas, in a minute' s silence, and I also think that we should dispense with a resolution on this matter.
Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting
The Minutes of the sitting of Friday 27 October have been distributed.
Are there any comments?
Madam President, our Minutes of the 27 October record our decision to pass a resolution about the Italian lettori and we were very grateful that the House carried it with such a large majority.
In the meantime, Members of the House should know that the president of the association of the lettori was last week visited in his classroom by the anti-terrorist police to check if he was planning any violent demonstration against the Minister of Education.
This would hardly count as a positive response to the resolution that we moved.
(The Minutes were approved)
Agenda
The next item is the final version of the draft agenda as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents on Thursday 9 November, pursuant to Article 110 of the Rules of Procedure.
a) Sittings of 13 to 17 November 2000 Relating to Monday:
With regard to the report by Mr Ceyhun, on behalf of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, I have received two requests: one request from the Group of the Party of European Socialists for referral of this report to committee, and one request from the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance for deferral of this report to a later part-session.
I will now give the floor to Mr Ceyhun, who will speak in his capacity as rapporteur and on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists.
Madam President, I should like to state - also on behalf of my group - that referring this report back to the committee responsible in accordance with Rule 144 of the Rules of Procedure would actually be the correct course of action for Parliament to adopt, because I prepared a report and only found out afterwards that the Council had plans in this field.
Since we were not given sufficient notice, it would make more sense to wait for the legislative proposals and only then have Parliament deal with this point so that we do justice to the problem.
For this reason, I would request that the report be referred back to committee without there being a debate on it in plenary today, and the committee responsible, the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, will certainly be able to deal with this matter properly.
It is therefore quite clear: the rapporteur recommends referral to committee.
He was also speaking on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists, who made this request.
Does anyone wish to speak in favour of this request for referral to committee?
Madam President, the report drafted by my colleague, Mr Ceyhun, is a very important one, and we, too, have heard that the Council has some new plans with regard to these matters.
I support Mr Ceyhun' s proposal, and I would be very grateful if the Council could clarify whether it really intends to put forward a new proposal with regard to this issue.
You are, thus, firmly in favour of the referral to committee.
Does anyone wish to speak against this request?
Madam President, it appears that the Council has known for some time that we were going to debate this subject today.
In my opinion, it has made an institutional error in changing its position at the last minute, keeping us in the dark right up until the very last moment and then exerting pressure upon someone to request that the report be referred back to committee.
We have done our job and, in my opinion, our work should be concluded irrespective of the Council' s position.
We are not the Council' s slaves: we have our institutional autonomy and I therefore consider this referral to committee totally inappropriate.
Madam President, I would like to speak on a point of order, regarding not the agenda, but the order of voting.
In order to simplify matters, I would like to propose that we vote on the oral question on the Euro-Mediterranean Conference at the start of voting time at 11.30 a.m. on Wednesday because, as you are aware, the Conference opens at 6 p.m. in Marseilles.
The voting session will be long and will be interrupted, amongst other things, by the welcome presence of President Kostunica. In addition, some of us will have to leave in order to be present at the opening of the Marseilles Conference, and so we would like to be able to vote on the oral question at the start of the session before all the other reports.
It would therefore merely be a matter of bringing forward the vote.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, our group regards this incident as being so important that we do not consider it appropriate for it to be dealt with in the topical and urgent debate.
We think that we should address this matter in the form of an oral question to the Council and the Commission, and would like to draft this carefully to ensure that both the Council and the Commission do discuss it.
We do not think that the time is right to discuss this matter in a topical and urgent debate and would therefore request that this item be deleted from the agenda.
Thank you, Mr Poettering.
Does anyone else wish to speak in favour of this request?
Mr Poettering has spoken on behalf of the group which requested that the item be deleted.
Madam President, no group is more sensitive than mine when it comes to sharing the quite natural concerns felt by the inhabitants of the Campo de Gibraltar area; therefore, as the Chairman of my group has already indicated, I should like to offer the Group of the Party of European Socialists a consensus so that we can have a serious and thorough debate on this matter by means of an oral question to the Council and the Commission.
If this was not the intention of those who proposed this resolution, if through lack of experience - not through lack of scruples, I am sure - what was intended was to bring an internal, domestic affair before this Parliament - as the spokesman for the Spanish Socialists in the Spanish national parliament recognised at the weekend - then of course they cannot count on the Group of the European People' s Party to play this game.
Madam President, my group has listened carefully to this proposal.
With regard to Mr Galeote' s statements, I must point out that this is not a domestic issue: it is an issue in which the Commission has competence, as it has itself declared in its reply to a question from our colleague, Mr Aparicio.
This reply also mentioned the lack of information and the obstacles raised by the British Government.
Thus we are not talking about some domestic issue; we are talking about the presence of a nuclear submarine, the breakdown of which has led the Royal Navy to decide to dock eleven submarines in British territory.
Therefore, under the Treaties and under the Euratom Treaty this issue falls within the competence of the Commission; it affects or may affect many citizens who are not just Spanish, because in this area and its surroundings - and there is no emergency plan in place - there are hundreds of thousands of European citizens from the fifteen countries of the Union as well as many people from outside, because this is the Costa del Sol.
We therefore believe that the matter deserves substantive consideration.
If the European People' s Party is proposing that at the next part-session we should support having this question taken up, we may consider it; if it is just a delaying tactic, we will be against it.
I should therefore like to ask for a formal commitment from the PPE that we should vote together in favour of having this matter included as a question to the Commission and the Council at the next part-session.
Mr Barón Crespo, I would like to make sure I understand you correctly.
I have received a proposal from the Group of the European People' s Party for this item to be withdrawn from the topical and urgent debate, for the reasons that Mr Poettering and Mr Galeote have just set out.
I have the impression that you agree with their rationale, Mr Barón Crespo, if I understand you correctly.
Are you in favour of this item being deleted?
Madam President, my group would be in favour of accepting the inclusion of this question on December' s agenda.
What we would not agree with is having this matter omitted and then seeing if it can be postponed indefinitely.
Yes, there is that, but let us just say that we are formally withdrawing the item from the topical and urgent debate.
However, we all quite agree that it should be discussed, as you have said.
Mr Poettering, is that what you intended?
Madam President, it is sad but very enlightening to learn from the Spanish Minister of the Interior, Mr Mayor Oreja, that there is no point in talking with Basque nationalists, even if a new cease-fire were to take place in the future.
This statement evidently does not support the position of our Spanish colleagues in this House when they affirm that in the Spanish Kingdom every political party can defend its ideas whatever they might be, with only one basic premise: the absence of violence.
Can this House back the refusal of dialogue?
Can this House close the door to political solutions?
Can this House close the door on the democratic future of the Basque country inside Europe?
I would appreciate it if points of order really were points of order, and I would be grateful if you could begin by indicating, as, moreover, is stipulated in the Rules of Procedure, the rule on which each point of order is based.
Madam President, I would like to draw your attention to a certain written statement that my colleague, Mr Ebner, is putting forward.
He is proposing that the Directive on birds should be amended to take better account of the principle of subsidiarity.
I would like to tell you and all my colleagues that this statement is being marketed in a way that makes it appear favourably disposed towards birds, as promoting their welfare, but I can tell you that that is not the case, and that this will worsen the situation of migratory birds in the European Union.
I would appeal to everyone that you at least make sure you know what you are signing if you sign this petition.
I fully support the letter written by my colleague, Dorette Corbey, which she has sent to our colleagues regarding this matter: there should be no misleading marketing regarding this written statement.
Madam President, some time ago in this House we discussed the issue of sanctions on Iraq.
I am very glad to see that the British Liberals have decided to call for a review of sanctions on Iraq.
The week before last I flew to Iraq, over Turkish airspace into Baghdad, on a humanitarian mission.
In the six months since I was last there, the situation has got worse.
More than 5,000 children are dying every month according to UNICEF.
The Commission should come to this House and address that issue.
These children have nothing whatsoever to do with the conflict in the Middle East.
The Commission have slavishly taken the US/British line, while the US and British and Turks continue to bomb southern Iraq.
Madam President, I would like you to advise the Commission to make a statement on the issue of sanctions.
Madam President, on a point of order.
I had indicated that I wanted to speak before you closed the discussion on the agenda.
May I ask that we consider, this week, a Commission statement on the decision of the UK government to introduce a discriminatory tax on non-British road hauliers.
I need not remind you or the House that this is completely contrary to the Treaties which guarantee unhindered access to the single market.
It is also contrary to Directive 99/62/EC which provides, and I quote, "that tolls and user charges may not discriminate directly or indirectly on the grounds of the nationality of the haulier, nor the origin or destination of the vehicle" .
This impacts extremely seriously on Irish trade.
70% of Irish lorries, Irish transporters, must go to, or through, the UK land bridge to Europe.
I should like to request a Commission statement and call on the Commission to use its powers to maintain the freedoms of the internal market and to ensure compliance with Directive 99/62/EC to which I have referred.
It is urgent that before the proposed change by the British authorities is implemented we have a debate and the Commission indicates quite clearly where the law lies in this regard.
Mrs Doyle, I allowed you extra time because that was not a point of order.
That was part of the order of business and I deeply regret not having been informed of it.
I feel that the Commission has been very receptive to your request, as Commissioner Vitorino has confirmed to me.
It will therefore be acted upon appropriately.
Madam President, with reference to the smooth running of Parliament and the safety of the Members, I would like to inform you that, during the last Strasbourg part-session, on Wednesday evening to be precise, the PPE Member from Forza Italia, Mr Mario Mantovani, slipped on the steps and fractured his left foot while taking his suitcases down to the taxi outside Parliament.
He stayed on to vote on Thursday morning and then his foot was put in plaster. He will not be able to take part in our work for 60 days.
On the one hand, a representative of the Pensioners' Party might welcome the presence of invalids - another pensioner perhaps - but, on the other, I would like all our Members to be safe.
I therefore ask you when a lift or an escalator will be installed, so that we will be able to go down to the cars at the end of the day in safety.
Madam President, I would like to inform Parliament of a serious initiative undertaken last week in Italy by the regional government of the Lazio region.
The regional government has established a committee to monitor the history textbooks used in schools.
The committee is to ascertain the extent to which these texts are influenced by Marxism - as the neo-fascists who are in power in Lazio say.
The fact is that these texts merely present the history of Italy, of the Second World War, of nazism and fascism, on the assumption that it is clear that the values for which the resistance and the antifascists were fighting and the ideas motivating Hitler and Mussolini cannot be regarded as equal.
This is an extremely serious initiative towards reintroducing censorship in Italy, limited to text books for the moment but which will soon be extended to other areas.
Since the allegedly liberal parties, including the European liberal parties, always tend to ally themselves with parties of xenophobic, racist, authoritarian inspiration, I feel that this is not only a serious danger for Italy, but also an indication of something which concerns the whole of Europe.
I would ask the Members to sign a petition which I am circulating, which also bears the signatures of other European intellectuals.
Mutual assistance in criminal matters
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports:
(A5-0313/2000) by Mr Marinho, on behalf of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, on the initiative of the French Republic with a view to adopting a Council Framework Decision on money laundering, the identification, tracing, freezing, seizing and confiscation of instrumentalities and the proceeds from crime [10232/2000 - C5-0393/2000 - 2000/0814(CNS)],
(A5-0312/2000) by Mrs Karamanou, on behalf of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, on the initiative from the Portuguese Republic with a view to adopting a Council Act on the drawing up on the basis of Article 43(1) of the Convention on the establishment of a European Police Office (Europol Convention) of a Protocol amending Article 2 and the Annex to that Convention [9426/2000 - C5-0359/2000 - 2000/0809(CNS)],
(A5-0314/2000) by Mrs Roure, on behalf of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs on the initiative of the French Republic with a view to adopting a Convention on improving mutual assistance in criminal matters, in particular in the area of combating organised crime, laundering of the proceeds from crime and financial crime [10213/2000 - C5-0394/2000 - 2000/0815(CNS)].
Madam President, the fight against financial crime and, in particular, crime involving money laundering, will feature at various points in today' s plenary sitting, and this reflects the political importance of the legal instruments which the European Union wishes to establish for the creation of the area of freedom, security and justice.
Following the creation of the internal market and the corresponding liberalisation of capital and of financial services, the Union has committed itself to the fight against money laundering.
This is a complex crime, which requires another, original, crime to have taken place, resulting in illegal profits that people attempt to recycle into normal, legal economic life.
Money laundering, which is the final destination for the proceeds of international crime and a consequence of the globalisation of the economy and of the gradual liberalisation of trade, is at the heart of organised crime, as stated in the Tampere conclusions, and is often the result of drug trafficking.
It is a sobering thought that the fight to end this activity involves seizing the proceeds of the original crime, which are later disguised as respectable wealth.
The only way to ensure that this fight is effective is through international cooperation, which in Europe, in the face of international crime, takes the form of judicial cooperation between all the Member States.
This report, therefore, highlights the measures proposed by the French Presidency, which, in conjunction with the Portuguese Presidency, has moved ahead with initiatives to approximate legislation, in line with the Tampere Council conclusions.
The Treaty of Amsterdam has also been implemented, not forgetting the good work that the Commission has carried out in this area and the commitment and clear thinking of Commissioner Vitorino.
There is, therefore, coherence between the three initiatives that are the subject of my report and of the reports by Mrs Karamanou and Mrs Roure in that the framework decision forces the Member States to comply with the outcome, in that Europol' s competence is extended to cover money laundering in terms of investigations and in that a convention improves mutual legal assistance.
We are therefore heading in the right direction for the creation of a broad, effective legal framework, which will at least limit this type of crime.
My report clearly supports the crux of the rationale behind the framework decision, with proposals that seek fundamentally to enable Member States to confiscate goods gained from serious crimes and to force them to punish offenders committing money-laundering crimes and to legislate against them, without the flexibility offered by the loopholes in previous legal instruments which made it easy for criminals to thumb their noses at the law and to control whole economies.
We also support the result of the binding nature of the framework decision, which forces Member States to harmonise their laws for the common good whilst being subject to judicial supervision by the Court of Justice.
The report also contains some criticism, however, of the French proposal.
Why should only a part of the previous joint action be transposed, which would leave these measures split into weak and strong legislation due to their different natures, highlighting the fragility of joint action?
Why not accept straightaway the complete transposal of the whole set into the framework decision, as stated in the amendments that I proposed, Nos 9, 12, 13 and 14?
Nor do we feel that tracing and confiscating goods should be restricted to cases in which the original crimes are classed as serious.
This would open up a totally unjustifiable and huge area of law consisting of crimes that will not be prosecuted at all. Hence Amendments Nos 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8.
Lastly, although I must reiterate my appreciation of the French and Portuguese initiatives under the genuinely broader scope that Amsterdam, despite everything, has provided - and let us be frank about this, the Commission has been able to turn this to good advantage - there are still such differences in the origin and the effectiveness of the various judicial methods, directives, joint actions, framework decisions, conventions and international conventions that it is becoming urgent to communitise judicial, criminal and civil law, and thereby create an area of justice at the service of freedom and security.
It is a shame that this is not already a priority in the reform of the Treaties, since the current IGC is at the mercy of the weight of the various Member States and of the measures that they wish to implement...
We nevertheless believe that the public will shortly be in a position to demand this new aspect of Europe.
They will be able to force through a revision of the Treaties that is concerned with their genuine interests and we believe that this revision will indeed be carried out in the name of freedom, security and justice.
Madam President, as Chairman of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, I rise to present Mrs Karamanou' s report.
Mrs Karamanou is sadly unable to be with us tonight, but I feel it appropriate that her report should be debated along with Mr Marinho' s excellent report, which we have just discussed.
The Republic of Portugal presented a draft Protocol amending Article 2 of the Convention on the establishment of a European Police Office, Europol.
This Portuguese initiative aims to extend Europol' s competences in order to establish a general framework of competence for Europol in relation to money laundering.
The fight against money laundering is, of course, one of the Union' s most important priorities, as rightly identified at the Tampere Summit last year.
Considering that money laundering is at the heart of organised crime, especially drug trafficking, which represents such a threat to public health and public security, one cannot but endorse this proposed measure.
Declarations must be followed by concrete steps to trace, freeze, seize and confiscate the proceeds of crime.
This proposed Protocol should be seen as a necessary measure in a European strategy for police cooperation in the field of money laundering.
But considering the urgency, our rapporteur seeks in her Amendment No 6 to have this Protocol adopted as quickly as possible that is, according to Article 34(2)(d) of the Treaty on European Union, when a majority of Member States have notified their approvals.
The committee which I have the honour to chair adopted Mrs Karamanou' s report nearly unanimously.
Much as we approved of the Portuguese initiative, however, we insist on a broader revision of the Europol Convention and indeed on mechanisms to ensure both democratic accountability and judicial control of Europol.
Let me touch briefly on those two matters.
On the question of democratic accountability, I note that at the moment Article 39 of the Europol Convention requires that the European Parliament simply be consulted on an annual report.
This is quite unacceptable and on several recent occasions, Parliament has requested, in particular in the Nassauer and Cederschiöld reports, modifications to the Europol Convention to ensure true democratic accountability of this agency.
In order for Parliament to exercise such democratic control, Europol must, as with the other European institutions such as the ECB and the Ombudsman, report on its activities in an annual exchange of views.
The Director of Europol should be required to appear before Parliament' s competent committees when circumstances require.
Moreover, Parliament should be represented on the management board of Europol and should have a say in the choice of the director of the agency.
These requests are covered in Amendments Nos 2 and 4 of Mrs Karamanou' s report.
On questions of judicial accountability, it seems to us equally unacceptable that possible disputes or conflicts between Member States or between Europol and Member States cannot be brought before the Court of Justice, despite the provisions of Article 35 of the Treaty which refer precisely to matters relating to police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters.
This contradiction conflicts with democratic values, particularly in regard to human rights, and especially in the field of data protection.
This lack of judicial accountability of Europol is particularly dangerous given that Europol seems to be assuming more and more responsibilities and this concern is covered in Mrs Karamanou' s Amendment No 5.
In conclusion, Parliament has considered attentively and positively this Portuguese initiative but we are unsatisfied with the limited scope of the proposed revision of the Europol Convention.
Faced with the challenge of internationally organised crime, the European Parliament must be able to represent the citizens of the Union effectively and this is why we must be fully informed of and involved in Europol' s activities, its programmes, effectiveness, methods and means.
I am fully aware that in this matter Parliament is only consulted.
Nevertheless, we urge the French Presidency, which has shown such a determined commitment to fight against money laundering, to take account of our demands.
The creation of a European area of freedom, security and justice cannot remain in the hands of a specialised agency under the sole control of national governments.
This is a major area of European integration and the European Parliament is ready to offer its support to policies in this area provided it is duly involved.
Madam President, international criminal networks have become considerably stronger and more organised in recent years.
Factors such as globalisation can be seen to have enhanced the possibilities of laundering dirty money and the means of avoiding prosecution.
According to figures released by the United Nations, 1 000 billion dollars are recycled every year through money laundering operations.
Money laundering is a difficult offence to detect, and crime syndicates take advantage of every loophole in the various legal systems.
As a result, international cooperation in police and judicial matters is the only way of effectively thwarting this illegal practice.
At European level, mutual assistance in criminal matters has already, in general terms, seen the adoption of several texts, such as the Council of Europe' s Convention of 20 April 1959 and, very recently, the European Convention of 29 May 2000, for which our fellow MEP, Mr Di Pietro, acted as rapporteur.
In the more specific area of combating money laundering, we could cite the Council Directive of 10 June 1991, as recently amended, for which our fellow MEP, Mr Lehne, acted as rapporteur.
The initiative from the French Presidency that we are examining today is aimed at improving the two blanket conventions on mutual assistance in criminal matters that I have just mentioned, specifically in the field of combating money laundering.
The convention that we have before us improves these earlier texts, and we welcome these improvements.
By virtue of Article 2 of the draft Convention, the Member States can no longer decline to conduct searches or seize items by invoking the reservations set out in Article 5 of the Convention of 1959.
Article 4 states that in order to facilitate enquiries, the Member States must take appropriate measures to promote the transfer and safekeeping of data relating to the existence, location and movement of the proceeds of crime, while Article 5 states that the Member States are required to furnish information on banking activities.
Article 6, for its part, provides for the making of supplementary requests for mutual assistance, and Article 7 states that fiscal exceptions can no longer constitute a reason for refusing mutual assistance.
One can only approve of the body of measures contained in this draft Convention.
They respond to the concerns expressed by the Tampere European Council concerning the fight against money laundering, which is the very root of organised crime and which must be eradicated wherever it is found.
It would seem to me that certain improvements could be proposed, and that is the point of my report.
The non-invocability of banking and commercial secrecy in response to requests for mutual assistance is set down in Article 3.
It would seem to me essential to extend this non-invocability to encompass the commercial and financial advice activities of lawyers and members of regulated legal professions, which due to their nature are not governed by professional secrecy.
Furthermore, Article 8 of the draft Convention limits the reasons which Member States may invoke for refusing to provide assistance to "essential interests" .
This represents progress, but for mutual assistance not to lose any of its impact in an area in which only rapid cooperation at European level can be of any meaning, it would seem worthwhile to only grant the Member State asked for information two months in which to make known its refusal to give assistance.
Article 9 requires the Member States to set up integrated multidisciplinary teams at national level in order to enhance the efficiency of searches and promote information exchanges.
I propose that a coordination unit be set up for these multidisciplinary teams.
This unit could facilitate information exchanges between the relevant authorities in the Member States and encourage the selection and use of best practices.
The sole aim of these proposals is to achieve mutual assistance that is as effective as possible and meets the challenges posed by organised crime, particularly in the field of money laundering.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, my task is a relatively easy one: if I am supposed to comment on behalf of the Legal Affairs Committee on the Portuguese Presidency' s proposal regarding involving Europol in the fight against money laundering, then I can only say that it is a good proposal.
That is also why we have only submitted a very small number of proposals for amendments, because we can, of course, agree to this proposal.
There is a broad consensus in all of the European institutions - including, of course, here in this House - that we want to take all reasonable and possible steps to counter money laundering. Previous speakers have already said all that needs to be said in this regard.
But, since I am now actually standing here and have the opportunity to comment on the issue of combating money laundering, I should very much like to voice some criticism.
I should like to criticise something which actually has nothing at all to do with the proposal which we are debating today, but with the impact of the political position adopted by the Council on the second directive to combat money laundering.
From the outset, the European Parliament tried to work in close cooperation with the Council.
I can only say that, as a result, the Council did admittedly make a big show of cooperating, but the bulk of the amendments tabled by us and adopted here in this House by a very large majority were not accepted.
In this respect, I can only say that if the concept of combating money laundering is damaged, then this is the fault of the Council and not of Parliament.
The rules which were designed in the past with banks and providers of financial services in mind have been applied, as it were, wholesale to some of the liberal professions, despite the fact that they are not at all suitable for them, and in full knowledge of the fact that under these circumstances it would be absolutely impossible to avoid a difficult second reading with the European Parliament and a conciliation procedure at the end.
After all, this is certainly not about the privileges of lawyers or practitioners of other liberal professions.
It is about fundamental rights.
Quite simply, it is about a client seeking legal advice or support before a court being able - as is also stated in the Charter of Fundamental Rights, by the way - to go to a lawyer whom he trusts and to obtain his advice, without, if he reveals something to him, the lawyer being obliged to go directly to the public prosecutor' s office to blow the whistle on him.
This is a fundamental right.
This fundamental right must not be meddled with.
The same goes for all areas where legal advice is dispensed.
I am therefore very grateful for the compromise formulation in the Roure report which was drafted here in committee, which has simply made it clear that this traditional protection of fundamental rights must continue to be guaranteed.
I should also like to make it clear, however, that when lawyers fulfil the same functions as banks and financial service providers, then there is obviously no reason to protect that part of their activities.
But this is about dispensing legal advice and representing people before a court of law.
The protection of fundamental rights must be guaranteed in this regard.
As I have said, that is why I support the proposals on the table today but, at the same time, I would take this opportunity to give you advance notice that there will be a real battle with the Council over the common position on the second directive to combat money laundering.
Madam President, I think that today' s debate is extremely important for the simple reason that it is about how we can put our house in order.
Allow me to start by congratulating Mr Marinho on his work and to say that, although we need to support efforts to combat financial crime, we also need to be careful.
The problem of financial crime is extremely complex: first it is a convoluted attempt to launder the proceeds of illegal activity and, secondly, it presupposes a series of other crimes which generated the illegal proceeds in the first place.
I think that European society today is being crushed by organised crime, in all its manifestations.
Financial crime, and first and foremost, perhaps, money laundering, is right at the epicentre of the organised crime plaguing Europe.
Without doubt, the initiative of the French Presidency, on which Mr Marinho has taken a stance, is the right initiative; however, the same holds true of Mr Marinho' s attempt to introduce stricter rules.
Of course, if we want results, we need to get right to the heart, right to the key of the tool which will help us fight these crimes. In my view, the key to fighting these crimes is to improve judicial cooperation.
As I was reading the explanatory statements attached to Mr Marinho' s amendments, one, in particular, caught my eye.
It says that economic Europe has reached a highly advanced stage. Political Europe is progressing slowly but, unfortunately, 15 internal borders continue to exist wherever judges and magistrates, legal proceedings and court decisions are concerned.
This phrase troubled me greatly because I think it is the key to the problem.
And I think - and I too fervently propose - that we need to take a great many steps, a great many fundamental steps, if we are to achieve judicial cooperation at European level and be able to fight crimes such as financial crime.
Ladies and gentlemen, judicial and police cooperation is one of the most fundamental issues in the construction of a European area of freedom, security and justice and will enable this area to swiftly become real and effective for the citizens.
In dealing with these matters, our rapporteurs have centred their considerations both on the Protocol amending the Europol Convention and on improving mutual assistance.
We can but congratulate them on their work.
Our primary concern, however, relates to the extension of Europol' s competences.
We agree that there is an express and urgent need for effective judicial cooperation, but, at the same time, denounce a shift that contains the seeds of a Europol set up outside the control of Parliament or of any legal authority, and, in more general terms, a democratic deficit in a Europe that the Member States insist in confining to the misty realms of intergovernmental procedures, thus skirting the obligations, duties and control that derive from universal suffrage.
I can see grey areas regarding Europol: the diplomatic immunity of its members, no definition of authorised resources nor of the limits on these, notifications of the filing of personal records, filing of records in areas protected by international texts and declarations of human rights, threats to freedoms given the risk of their being abused, now or in the future, following the kind of political changes liable to be seen in certain Member States.
Were the European police force to be offered this heaven-sent chance of potential self-regulation, it would do its utmost to curb the European Parliament' s vague desire for democratic control, given the current deficiencies at organisational level and the lack of unity on the background issues.
The Portuguese initiative concerning the Europol Convention is intended to spur the European Parliament into choosing the right route to ensuring security, with this hingeing around a discretionary filing of records on citizens in all the areas affecting their private lives.
Of course, we must identify, prosecute and sentence people who launder dirty money on behalf of terrorists, arms dealers and drug traffickers.
But this will not provide us with firmer guarantees on the right of defence and the protection of citizens' rights.
It is for this reason that we are tabling amendments on the strengthening of these rights and freedoms, on the need to adopt an instrument, on the right of defence, and on the recognition of the jurisdiction of the Court of Justice.
It has not escaped our notice that one of the articles in the Council Act, which has curiously not been commented on, stipulates that Europol is to specify whether data relating to ethnic origin, religious or other types of beliefs, political leanings, sexual tendencies or health can be included in the data records.
Are we going to equivocate any longer over Europol' s competences when the very notion of democratic control has been struck off the statute book?
The democratic values that everyone in this Chamber shares must be the very ones that govern our deeds and works, in order to forge a European Union based on solidarity and social commitment and not on policing and repression.
Mr President, allow me to start by congratulating our rapporteur, Mr Marinho.
I think that his analysis is extremely accurate and shows us how we really can make headway in combating the laundering of what we call 'black' or 'dirty' money.
I would remind the House that we aim to use this policy to fight organised crime, i.e. drug smuggling, trafficking in women and children and many other wretched activities which have a terrible impact on society as a whole, even - and I say this somewhat cynically - the economy itself, in that it is generally acknowledged that this money increases the money supply and often destabilises monetary policy.
The rapporteur is quite right in saying - and I too should like to say - that, having opened our borders, albeit for other reasons, to organised criminals, we must also open our borders to the bodies - i.e. the police and the courts - responsible for pursuing them.
And, of course, we must do so on the basis of a common definition of what crime is and of what methods it uses, so that it cannot flee from one country to another, at least not for purely procedural reasons.
The way forward, as Mr Marinho says - and I agree with him - is communitisation.
Obviously, because that takes us the way of parliamentary and democratic control.
However, there are still a great many issues outstanding, even if we accept everything that has been said so far. There are many serious issues outstanding.
What I mean is this: there are countries today in the European Union which tolerate or even take advantage of strange situations, offshore companies, strange banking regulations and other such things and they do not inspire me personally with any confidence that what we agree will be implemented.
Political unification, political control may be what we need to resolve these questions and, by extension, the reviews and harmonisation of the laws governing these issues.
These are issues which require institutional changes which, unfortunately, not even Nice will make.
I welcome this debate.
Illegal sales of narcotics and other criminal activities, such as arms smuggling, are generating billions of euros annually, most of it in cash which has to be laundered.
Our task is to detect, trace, freeze, seize and confiscate the proceeds of organised crime.
We are faced with criminals who will use every possible means to avoid detection.
We are at war with these people.
Human life is expendable in the business of illegal profits.
We need to coordinate fully our approach.
Crime has no frontiers.
The Proceeds of Crime Act, which my government introduced in Ireland, has been successfully utilised by our Criminal Assets Bureau to deprive those involved in criminal activities from enjoying the fruits of their crime.
By the end of last year, the Bureau had obtained orders and property to the value of EUR 20 million under the Act and had made tax demands of more than EUR 40 million.
While cooperation is growing between the EU Member States and our law enforcement agencies, the scale of money laundering and fraud is so vast that we are still only tinkering with the problem.
One thousand billion dollars is the estimated annual volume of capital recycled by money laundering operations involving financial arrangements.
These funds could be used in our towns and for other social purposes.
I welcome this debate and discussion.
I want to speak about the Karamanou report on Europol.
Everybody who has spoken agrees that it is a very valuable initiative and we support what it says.
However, as many speakers have said, there is not enough democratic control and accountability.
That is the main focus of the cross-party amendments which the Committee is putting forward.
We want to see parliamentary involvement in the appointments of the director, and by a majority vote because, when we have enlargement to 28 Member States, it will be very difficult to find everybody agreeing on the identity of the director.
It has to be by a majority vote - we propose two-thirds - and we also want parliamentary involvement in the dismissal of the director, if ever that becomes necessary, by a two-thirds vote as well.
We want parliamentary involvement in the management board.
We could enormously improve democratic accountability and control.
And we want the Court to be involved in disputes.
These things are in the amendments and, judging by the debate in the committee, I am very hopeful that Parliament will vote for them.
However, I want to look for just a few moments at the future, and at what comes beyond this proposal.
I see two signs, one good and one bad.
The bad development in the future which many colleagues have spoken about - including my friend, Mr Andrews - is the remorseless growth in organised crime which we are seeing across Europe.
The opening of frontiers for the single market was a thoroughly good idea but it has also helped the Mafia, and criminals from Eastern Europe to spread their tentacles across our Union.
When we get enlargement, which is the good aspect of the future that I see, we are going to find it more and more difficult to counter organised crime.
The criminals can move freely across frontiers but our police forces cannot.
Already today there are about 120 different police forces in the European Union, most of them, I may say, in my own Member State, because in the United Kingdom we have a police force in every single county and they only work up to their county borders.
We have far too many police forces already and we are going to have even more once we have completed enlargement, our ability to deal with organised crime is going to be very much less than it should be.
What we need is for Europol to be given operational capability across frontiers.
At public meetings, when I talk about the growth in organised crime, the response invariably from the public is, "Well, what are you doing about it?
Get on with it.
Take the necessary powers.
Organise the police forces so we can deal with the growth in crime."
The public is in favour and - as very often happens - is ahead of us and the Council of Ministers.
I should very much like to hear the Commissioner' s reaction to the idea that when we hopefully get the concept of enhanced cooperation accepted at the Nice Summit next month that we create a European FBI.
We do not have to call it a European FBI, but that is the logical next step.
It would have full public support and it is necessary for the future.
Mr President, I regret that mine will be a somewhat discordant voice in this House tonight, save for that of my colleague, Mrs Boumediene-Thiery.
It is, of course, the case that this House has set itself a worthy and good objective.
But good ends do not justify any means whatever.
It seems to me that this set of initiatives is going forward in a way which risks setting at naught the protection provided by Article 6 of the European Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.
I do not see adequate account being taken of the right of defence, as Mrs Boumediene-Thiery said. I do not see adequate account of the rights of individuals to a fair trial, to fair presentation of charges before them.
Without that, I fear we are creating a Frankenstein' s monster, though we, like Count Frankenstein, seek to do good.
We must ensure that as we move towards mutual recognition of judgments we are establishing in Europe the highest common standard, not the lowest common denominator, when it comes to protecting persons brought into the justice system.
As a member of this House, I have had cases brought to my attention.
One example is a person on a money laundering charge, held for 364 days in custody in Portugal without any charge being presented.
When finally it was presented it was in many pages of Portuguese, with an insufficient English summary translation, even though the person concerned knew no Portuguese.
I have come across cases in France of lorry drivers, held on suspicion of drug trafficking - a shocking crime if it has been committed, but these persons are held in unacceptable conditions with no effective right to a defence of their own choosing, with inadequate or no interpretation facilities, with no opportunity to prove their innocence by due process of law in a reasonable time.
While we live in a Europe in which such blots exist on our escutcheons we need to be extremely careful that the steps we are taking for good do not end up destroying civil liberty in some of its most fundamental aspects in Europe.
Mr Andrews is right: those heavy penalties ought to fall upon those properly convicted, after fair trial, of offences of the kind we are considering.
We must ensure that those who are the innocent victims - the collateral damage I suppose we should call it - of the war upon crime are not left languishing in jails, incommunicado from their families.
There is too much of that in our contemporary Europe and before I give my support to a headlong rush to mutual recognition, I would like to see common recognition of fair standards.
Mr President, I should like, in good faith, to accept that both the initiative of the French Presidency and our rapporteurs' reports are calling for better ways of combating money laundering.
However, this raises two important questions.
First, the upshot of the proposals under discussion is that they strengthen judicial and police cooperation with a view to creating a single European area of justice with communitised civil and criminal procedures.
What I should like to know is if there is a country in Europe or area in the world, such as the USA, which already has a single area of justice and which has effectively combated the problem of money laundering, or are we endeavouring, ostensibly in order to combat a real problem, to communitise crucial institutions which are bound up with the national independence and grass-roots sovereignty of the Member States?
Secondly, will strengthening judicial and police cooperation allow us to combat the role of tax havens, of offshore centres and companies and, often, of the Member States themselves which, with their policies on transactions involving government securities, bonds and interest-bearing bills of exchange, help money launderers enormously?
Perhaps more honesty is needed and economic and social measures of a different sort if we are to combat this huge problem which is bound up with the very machinery of the economic system in a fully liberalised and unaccountable market economy?
Mr President, all EU countries have agreed to combat money laundering, and this unity is, of course, to be applauded unreservedly.
In reality, however, it is not all as simple as that.
I think that this Parliament is complicating the problems instead of simplifying matters and making them more efficient, and this may be seen in the proposal to extend Europol' s powers.
This Assembly should give priority to establishing genuine and effective instruments for combating money laundering and professionally organised crime.
The reaction to this initiative, taken in Finland, is both unfortunate and instructive.
It stands to reason that, through cooperation between the countries, crime and money laundering could be better combated.
Why, then, is the Commission' s new system thought to be needed?
In my view, it is not clear in which areas efforts are to be concentrated, except for the fact that countries are to have a uniform method of protecting data imposed upon them.
Or, to put it another way, the fight against money laundering ought not to be impeded by the Commission having to organise its efforts in accordance with the most indulgent and indifferent Member States.
Parliament ought not to frustrate the Council of Ministers' initiatives and the initiatives from those countries which are most inclined to stop these crimes.
Parliament should be encouraging the Council of Ministers and the Member States.
The trend should be towards establishing uniform definitions of criminal acts, and the countries' police and judicial systems ought to cooperate.
Mr President, I have asked for these five minutes to speak today on the Roure report on behalf of my group, the Group of the European People' s Party.
Following Mr MacCormick' s splendid intervention, I should like to make an initial observation.
Here we have three initiatives aimed at combating organised crime, a major blight on society.
They contain a clear political desire to combine efforts, to go further and to develop this area of freedom, security and justice.
To do this we have to take care that measures do not become dispersed, with the creation of an absolutely lopsided situation in which, as Mr MacCormick has so rightly said, one part of the process suffers.
We must be especially careful with this since what is at stake is the distinguishing mark of European identity: the protection of fundamental rights and guarantees of a fair trial.
As a result of the Tampere agreements, we need the guarantees of a fair trial to be developed in the area of the third pillar, and we need these guarantees to be developed when transnational situations arise, such as the ones he has described.
This picks up on the theme of Mr Lehne' s intervention.
Mr Lehne was explaining the problem of a lawyer' s professional secrecy in the context of this fight against money laundering.
Well, here we have another good example: in combating money laundering we may put at stake something that, far from being a lawyer' s privilege, is an essential element in this right to a fair trial, which in turn is an essential element in all our European development, culture and identity.
I realise it is very difficult because here we have to construct something from a scattering of instruments.
We have a directive to combat money laundering; we have a framework decision to combat it; we have an amendment to the Europol Convention.
At some moment, we will have to compile all these texts because, Mr President, you and, doubtless, all of us here know that for this to be implemented by judges - who are the ones that have to implement it while guaranteeing the right to a fair trial - with this scattered system we are, of course, very poorly guided.
I shall now focus on another issue, which also concerns the quality of the legislation.
This report includes a recital on the Geneva appeal, and the Group of the European People' s Party will vote against it, not because we are against the Geneva appeal, but simply because as Parliament we must ensure the quality of legislation.
The Geneva appeal is not a recital; it is not a legal reference nor a quasi-legal reference to a European Council.
Finally, on the PPE' s initiative, two amendments to Article 8 have been included, because if we agree on the political will to combat organised crime, we cannot provide a chance for a Member State to refuse this cooperation - we are talking about legal cooperation, between judges - by invoking matters of national interest.
Where does national interest come in when it is a case of one judge in the European Union asking for the cooperation of another judge in the European Union?
What intermediate authority is going to interfere saying that there is national interest involved here?
Let us be clear that it is one of two things: either we want to develop this area and not just leave a fine-sounding phrase in the Treaty, or - let us bow to the evidence - we do not want to carry what we have put in the Treaty through to its ultimate consequences and achieve this area of freedom, security and justice.
Lastly, Mr President, the Group of the European People' s Party supports the compromise amendment that we have reached with Mrs Roure on lawyers' activities.
When lawyers act outside professional advice, outside what is fitting for a lawyer, let justice descend on them as it does on everyone else, because their professional secrecy is not a privilege for them, it is a right deriving from the legal structure and the guarantee of a fair trial.
Hence we realise that the compromise amendment is certainly redundant, but for the sake of consensus in the House we shall vote in favour.
Mr President, I should like to conclude by asking the Commission, in the difficult task it has ahead of it, in which it is making an enormous effort, to take into account these initiatives that I am putting forward on behalf of the Group of the European People' s Party.
Mr President, Commissioner, the Marinho report deplores the fact that borders have been opened up for criminals but remain closed to the institutions whose duty it is to bring them to justice.
What can one expect?
You wanted a Europe solely geared to throwing open the doors to the free movement of goods and capital.
Dirty money follows the same channels as any other type of money, even if many of the transactions made by companies of some standing are not as dirty as the capital transactions of the Cali cartel.
What I am talking about are the proceeds of corruption and the profits reaped from exploiting children in less developed countries.
You are incapable of taking genuine measures to prevent money laundering because to do so would entail laying the blame at the door of banking and financial groups, since they are the ones who are able to launder this money by cloaking themselves in banking secrecy.
All the big banks themselves set up subsidiaries in tax havens, and these tax havens only exist because there are banks who use them.
They do this with encouragement from the Member States themselves, such as France and the Netherlands in the case of Saint-Martin, and Great Britain in the case of the Channel Islands and elsewhere.
We are the only ones here who want to see measures that truly prevent money laundering, which is to say the immediate abolition of banking secrecy, the trade secret, the business secret, access to the accounting ledgers of all banking and manufacturing companies and the right of all the employees of these companies, of all consumers, to bring to the public' s attention any transfer of funds that is against the interests of society at large.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, our objective is, and must be, to extend the economic union into a security union.
This is a task emanating from the Treaty of Amsterdam and the Tampere Summit.
However, it is also necessary if we are to strengthen the attractiveness of the European Union as a location for business; moreover it is something which the public wants and we must respect their wishes because the people who live in the European Union have a right to security.
Today we are discussing how we can take one step further towards this security union.
We are discussing this in connection with measures to combat money laundering.
If money is the driving force behind organised crime, then the measures which we are discussing today to combat money laundering throughout the world are part of our battle against this organised crime.
If we can stamp out money laundering, then, in so doing, we will, in the end, also stamp out organised crime.
Organised crime - as has been stated here several times, and as we know - generates huge profits from drug trafficking, trafficking in human beings, nuclear proliferation, car smuggling and from many other sectors including, even, the art trade.
All of this illegally acquired money is, however, laundered and put into circulation in the legal economy.
That is also the aim of organised crime and in this way organised crime and laundered money damage the legal economy of the European Union.
The economy is being infiltrated on a huge scale.
That is why these measures to combat money laundering are so very important.
We can only tackle the situation as a whole, however, if we have a combination of several instruments to combat money laundering.
Today we have an opportunity to discuss four such reports and measures in parallel.
The first is to extend Europol' s remit.
We know that Europol has competences in various fields, but now money laundering is to be added as an independent area of competence.
This is a good thing.
However, we must not forget to provide Europol with sufficient staff and funding so that it is actually able to assume the responsibilities which we are assigning it.
I should also like to take this opportunity to call - as colleagues have done before me - for a serious anomaly finally to be removed and Europol to be subject to the same supervision as other institutions of the European Union.
The second measure, the second instrument, is harmonisation.
It only makes sense for Europol to have the relevant powers if we also succeed in harmonising the substantive and formal provisions of criminal law, in terms of what constitutes a criminal offence, the severity of the penalty and the confiscation of the proceeds of crime.
The third point is a fundamental one, namely that it is also important to improve mutual assistance in legal matters.
Mrs Palacio made clear reference to this point, saying how necessary it was to also involve the relevant occupational groups and to make it clear to the Member States that here European interests need to come before national interests.
My last point - and I think that this is also relevant - is the establishment of Eurojust or the provisional unit, because this is about improving coordination on investigations and prosecutions.
The European Union and we, the European Parliament, are seizing a new opportunity in the fight against organised crime, which preoccupies us to such an extent.
The Union is thus laying a building block in the transition from an economic union to a security union.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, the development of the economy and the phenomenon of globalisation have been accompanied in recent years with an increase in international crime.
According to the United Nations, the annual volume of money recycled through money-laundering operations is approaching USD 1 billion.
In the European Union, we must continue to fight resolutely against money laundering, in the knowledge that, particularly after the creation of the single market and the liberalisation of the capital and financial services markets, there needs to be effective police and judicial cooperation between Member States which is as efficient as possible.
Today we are discussing three reports that acknowledge the fact that money laundering lies at the root of organised crime and must therefore be eradicated, wherever it may take place.
To this end, the Marinho report proposes that a guarantee should be given that specific measures will be adopted to trace, freeze, seize and confiscate the proceeds from crime, requiring a joint mobilisation of police and judicial resources in order to ensure that criminals or the proceeds from crime can find no hiding place in the European Union.
I agree with the general thrust of the report, but I harbour some doubts as to the rapporteur' s amendment claiming that this framework decision should also apply to less serious crimes.
The aim of this framework decision is to combat the major crimes that are at the root of money laundering, not small crimes punishable by a lesser sentence, which, if considered within the scope of this framework decision, could negate its very purpose.
The Karamanou report seeks to extend Europol' s competences to cover the crime of money laundering by strengthening police cooperation and by providing Europol with more effective instruments.
This is a Portuguese initiative that has already been commended by a number of previous speakers.
Finally, the Roure report seeks to remove a large number of judicial obstacles to mutual legal assistance and, at the same time, provides for the adoption of practical measures designed to strengthen this cooperation.
I would like to see the report' s guideline with regard to the professional confidentiality of lawyers maintained, a guideline that has already received a favourable vote in this Parliament - when the Lehne report on money laundering was adopted.
We also acknowledge here that professional confidentiality is an essential factor in the administration of justice, since any breach of this law could entail a violation of our citizens' civil liberties.
Mr President, I must begin by informing the House that I am a lawyer by profession, although my membership of the Portuguese Bar Association has been suspended at my request.
I shall therefore only speak from this specific view point, because I feel that the amendment to Article 3 in the Roure report that we are discussing entails, in the very way in which the compromise is worded, an unacceptable attack on the professional confidentiality of lawyers.
Professional confidentiality is the basic premise, the correlative and the consequence of a relationship of trust that is established between lawyers and their clients.
This applies regardless of whether or not there is a legal obligation, because confidentiality stems from the simple fact that the client is seeking advice from the lawyer or is simply treating them as a confidant.
Article 47 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights, which has recently been adopted, stipulates that everyone has the right to be advised, defended and represented in the law and Article 48 states that respect for the right of the defence of anyone who has been charged shall be guaranteed.
Seen in this light, professional confidentiality is a lawyer' s inalienable duty.
Where would we end up if, in this context, lawyers were not bound to maintain this confidentiality or if they were forced to become an informer rather than a legal counsel?
Lawyers should not have to bear the responsibility for the inefficiency or the weakness of the authorities charged with investigating crimes of money laundering or any other type of crime.
With regard to a compromise situation on this issue, there are two options: either the article in question refers to people who concentrate on certain activities and does not need to mention lawyers or any other professional category, or it refers to lawyers, creating a situation which in itself threatens professional confidentiality, however much the article specifies or defines the activities to which it refers.
There is no reason to assume that, if a lawyer is acting as a financial adviser, he or she is not exercising his or her profession.
To conclude, Mr President, I shall limit myself to saying that the position of my country' s Bar Association on this issue is quite clear: professional confidentiality is the cornerstone and the fundamental duty of the lawyer.
Any lawyer accused of carrying out or participating in criminal practices can be prosecuted, like any other citizen, but no lawyer can be forced to state or provide information on facts they have learned in the exercise of their professional activity.
Lawyers are forbidden to do anything that is not strictly legal.
The Bar Association has final and binding authority on issues of professional confidentiality and it falls to that body to decide whether or not to authorise - in exceptional cases - the disclosure of information at the request of the courts.
For all of these reasons, Mr President, I shall vote against the amendment to Article 3, even as a compromise wording for the legislative proposal.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, as various speakers have emphasised, we are today looking at three legal instruments dealing with an activity that lies at the very heart of organised crime - money laundering.
At the same time, this is the most vulnerable area in such organised crime because money-laundering activity is the point at which it is attempted to filter the proceeds of illegal activities into the lawful economic system.
This is where Member States, through police and judicial cooperation, can act most effectively to combat organised crime.
This was the political will expressed by the Heads of State and Government at the Tampere European Council, in October 1999, when they called for specific action to fight money laundering.
This was also the subject of the joint Justice and Internal Affairs/Ecofin Council meeting held on 17 October.
The Commission welcomes the fact that this meeting took place and supports the French initiative to adopt a Council Framework Decision on money laundering, on the identification, tracing, freezing, seizing and confiscation of the instrumentalities and the proceeds from crime.
We are convinced that this framework decision will constitute a significant advance in enabling common sanctions to be established for all the countries in the European Union.
This means that, with this framework decision, we will have two legal instruments establishing, not just common incriminations, but also common sanctions for two types of offences.
I am referring here to the Framework Decision on the protection of the euro and now the Framework Decision on money laundering as well.
I therefore wish to congratulate Mr Marinho on his excellent report and to say that I share his concerns that we are moving closer and closer towards a definition of money-laundering offences that must lead to the adoption of common sanctions at European level.
It is my view that, specifically where Mr Marinho suggests that common offences should be defined for those cases that are punished less severely or for other illegal acts provided for in Article 6 of the European Council Convention on money laundering, we ought not to consider this approach straightaway, but base our concern on an assessment of the specific results that are obtained following the implementation of the joint action that was agreed on in December 1998 and which has not yet shown all that it can do.
Similarly, I would ask the House to reconsider its position, if possible, with regard to the amendments that have been proposed for the dates that have been stipulated for the adoption of national legislation on the transposal of this framework decision.
I repeat, I should like to ask Parliament to revise the date of 31 December 2002, so that the Commission can present an assessment report on the transposal of the framework decision into national law.
I make this request because the new dates proposed by the rapporteur would mean that 31 December 2002 would be the deadline for the Member States to transpose this framework decision into their own national legislation.
Lastly, with regard to the issue of reasons for refusing criminal judicial cooperation that are laid down in Article 18 of the 1990 Convention, we agree that they should be revised in order to limit even further the conditions in which Member States can refuse to provide judicial cooperation, as referred to in the report by Mrs Roure, but I shall go into this issue in a few minutes' time.
Similarly, I wish to thank Mrs Roure for her report on the French Presidency' s initiative for a Convention on improving mutual legal assistance in criminal matters, specifically in the fight against organised crime.
I also wish to remind you that this Convention must be linked, by means of close coordination, with the draft Directive that is currently under discussion in the Economy and Finance Council, revising the Directive of 10 June 1991 on money laundering.
The Convention must also be linked with the discussion already started by the Justice and Home Affairs Council, with a view to removing the right not to breach tax and banking confidentiality in criminal cases to prevent judicial cooperation in the fight against money laundering.
For the Commission' s part, and we await Parliament' s opinion on this, we feel that the decisions not to allow tax and banking confidentiality to be invoked if this impedes the prosecution of money-laundering crimes are essential instruments to guaranteeing the success of this legislation at European level.
With regard to Mrs Roure' s proposal, I would ask her to consider this point: I think it would be more effective to say that any refusal to cooperate in judicial matters by the Member State which has been asked to do so must be communicated to the petitioning State immediately, rather than imposing a deadline of two months.
As I understand it, 'immediately' makes the requirement more pressing than setting a deadline of two months for a refusal to cooperate.
By the same token, I wish to say that I am aware of the sensitiveness of the issue raised by various Members about the conditions in which the confidentiality of the legal professions may constitute a justified refusal to cooperate in the fight against money laundering.
As you know, this issue does not fall within the competence of the Justice and Home Affairs Council but within that of the Economy and Finance Council.
I must add that I am still waiting for the European Parliament' s opinion on this matter.
What I would like to stress here today, from my own point of view, is that this opinion must not only enshrine clear, unambiguous legislation on guarantees to protect defendants and on the conditions in which the confidentiality of the legal professions - and of lawyers in particular- may be legitimately exercised.
Above all, what needs to be stressed is the fact that the same definition should apply to all judicial instruments.
In other words, the definition that has just been adopted by this Parliament in its opinion on the Directive on money laundering should encompass the same judicial solution that has just been adopted here with regard to the Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters.
I say this because having different formulas in the two instruments would only lead to greater confusion in their interpretation and difficulties in their practical application.
Lastly, the Commission is also pleased to note the support Parliament has given to extending Europol' s competences to cover all forms of money laundering.
The Karamanou report, on which I should also like to congratulate the rapporteur, proposes various amendments with regard to improving the democratic and judicial control of Europol.
You all know how important I consider the issue of such control to be.
To be frank, however, I do not think that this initiative is the appropriate occasion to be adopting decisions in this field.
In fact, the Commission, in the course of the work laid down in the assessment panel for the creation of an area of freedom, security and justice, known as the 'scoreboard' , is currently studying the best way to adopt a judicial instrument that will facilitate the communitisation of Europol and not just the adoption of piecemeal measures under the Europol Convention.
The best way of strengthening Parliamentary control of Europol is to fully integrate the Europol Convention into the European Union' s' judicial framework.
In the same way, I doubt that it is good policy to resort to the mechanism referred to in Article 34(2)(d) of the Treaty for the entry into force of this amendment on the Europol Convention.
We feel that extending Europol' s competences should be carried out at the same time in all Member States and not in a staggered way, which could lead to greater confusion.
Mr President, the Commission welcomes the fact that Parliament feels able to support these three initiatives, which, in fact, all have an important role in strengthening an action plan for combating money laundering.
We also hope that the Member States will match these initiatives by adopting them rapidly in the Council, but, above all, by ratifying the conventions in question with all speed so that they can enter into force in their respective national legal systems.
Thank you, Commissioner.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.
Provisional Judicial Cooperation Unit
The next item is the report (A5-0317/2000) by Mrs Gebhardt, on behalf of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, on an initiative of the Portuguese Republic, the French Republic, the Kingdom of Sweden and the Kingdom of Belgium with a view to adopting a Council Decision setting up a Provisional Judicial Cooperation Unit [10356/2000 - C5-0395/2000 - 2000/0816(CNS)]
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, part of the price of freedom is that the democratic state under the rule of law frequently chases wrongdoers from quite some distance when it wishes to prosecute them.
This is especially true of serious, very serious and cross-border crimes.
Organised crime is particularly difficult to bring under control because the odds are stacked unevenly.
The perpetrators are ruthless and know nothing of borders, restrictions or rules.
Their pursuers are, for good reason, bound by the procedures of the rule of law.
I may paint a gloomy picture, but we do have reason for hope.
The European Union is making progress in the fight against serious crime.
It has a good chance of catching up with many wrongdoers and meting out to them the punishments which they deserve.
The public can demand this; above all it expects it in an increasingly homogeneous area of law and freedom, which also offers them protection and security for their material property.
A step in the right direction, for which the European Parliament has been striving for a long time now, is the creation of a provisional unit for judicial cooperation.
In my opinion, the adjective 'provisional' should disappear as soon as possible and make way for Eurojust as an effective European prosecution body.
The German Justice Minister initiated this; it was at her suggestion that the Tampere Summit decided to establish Eurojust over a year ago.
Since then, Portugal, France, Sweden and Belgium have driven the project forward with their initiative to establish a provisional unit for judicial cooperation.
The Tampere mandate is to reinforce, through Eurojust, the Member States' cooperation in the fight against organised crime.
Prosecutors, magistrates and police officers seconded from the Member States should work in a cross-border capacity to coordinate the national public prosecution services and assist criminal investigations in cases of organised crime.
The unit is expected to cooperate closely with Europol and the European Judicial Network.
As rapporteur, I actually only had one additional request.
Cooperation should not be limited only to organised crime. In the interests of the public it must cover the entire spectrum of serious and cross-border crime.
That is why I have proposed to extend the legal base by adding Article 29 of the Treaty on European Union.
The committee responsible has gone along with me on this and I am pleased to say that the signals coming from the Council are also positive.
We should be in agreement in one further respect too.
The provisional unit, which we are now debating, can only be the first step on a road which leads via Eurojust to a genuine European public prosecution service.
This is not only necessary from an organisational point of view so as to ensure that we are able to tackle serious crime together.
It is also necessary to uphold the rule of law.
Overall the task is so great and so important that it cannot be overseen by the Council alone.
In addition to the Council' s decision in Tampere, we need the expertise and experience of the Commission and the political will of the European Parliament.
If the Council, the Commission and Parliament act in unison, the end result will be considerable added value in terms of law and security for the people of Europe.
I believe that the Tampere decision and the initiative of the four Member States constitute a good starting point.
Let us continue to work together on this basis.
Ladies and gentlemen, although the need for a future European public prosecution service would not seem to pose a problem in the long run, that of harmonising our policies on the protection of citizens' rights and establishing a criminal procedure par excellence would seem to be more than essential.
Indeed, how can one possibly set up a European public prosecution service when there is not even a European civil code or, what is more, a European criminal code?
Even if this circumstance presents no direct obstacle to the initiative on the creation of Eurojust, there is in fact one institution over which the European Parliament exercises no control and over which judicial control by the Court of Justice of the European Communities, pursuant to Article 35 of the Treaty, is not applied.
How could one possibly consider setting up Eurojust when Europol is already operating as a free agent?
Two things must be borne in mind: we cannot contemplate any tangible improvement in judicial cooperation between the Member States without this clearly being conditional on the protection of the rights of the defence in legal proceedings involving more than one State.
This is the aim of our amendments.
It follows that citizens' rights must be reinforced by adopting an effective instrument and recognising the jurisdiction of the Court of Justice, not least with regard to its right of interpretation and its power to decide on a case or not.
Moreover, the flaws in the new efforts to combat organised crime can be attributed to the division of competences between Europol and Eurojust, and these have not been clearly addressed in any case or at any point.
Well, as you know, the issue of competence and the limits on this competence are central to this Community harmonisation aimed at improving the justice system.
The clear allocation of fields of intervention to either judicial cooperation or police cooperation is not only needed to prevent any conflict of responsibilities, but is also fundamental in terms of guaranteeing observance of the democratic rules that form the bedrock of the rule of law.
The Member States of the European Community subscribe to these on the basis of their existing legislative, executive and legal systems, in accordance with the principle of fundamental rights and common values.
Eurojust must therefore slot into the relationship between judicial cooperation and police cooperation.
The European Parliament is the supranational Community body that can determine this relationship, and I therefore propose that you support its validity by showing support for our rapporteur.
Mr President, I would like to join my other colleagues in congratulating the rapporteur on her work even though I may not give full agreement or support to what has been proposed.
We in the European Union have been moving more and more towards closer cooperation and coordination, as Mrs Palacio has already stated, in areas such as the single market and environment.
However, there have been difficulties in the whole area of police and judicial affairs, in particular because of fear or lack of trust with regard to the efficiency or the ability of individual police forces or individual judicial networks to deal with the volume of crime which is now being highlighted at a cross-border level.
Therefore, one of the proposals coming forward from the Tampere Summit was the establishment of Eurojust.
While I have no difficulty whatsoever in allowing our judges and legal experts in Member States to exchange information, to cooperate, to meet and to understand each other' s practices, I have difficulty with the final conclusion of this whole debate which will be the appointment of a European public prosecutor.
Even though we are assured that a European public prosecutor' s remit will be limited, that does not mean that would be the end of the story, because we have differing legal systems within the European Union.
For instance, in Ireland and the UK our criminal code is based on the common law system whereas it is the old Roman law or civil law code in most other European countries.
There are huge differences there which are exemplified on a daily basis in Europol and Interpol where there is a lack of certainty and difficulties between the Member State police forces with regard to what can be done and what can be achieved.
There are also worries within Member States as I know from an Irish point of view: I have dealt with sixteen cases of people who have been detained in Spain.
We could not get any action from Europol or from Interpol operators in that country and there was a lack of understanding of the necessity for somebody to be brought to trial as quickly as possible.
Therefore, whilst I support more cooperation and coordination, I think making this a legislative system would be wrong and we would oppose it.
Mr President, over this part-session we are going to be called upon to express our opinions on a number of proposals regarding the creation of an area of security and justice.
I omit the word 'freedom' in consideration of the attitude of the Council and the Member States - I repeat, of the Council and the Member States - in strengthening Europe' s repressive framework, aided and abetted by Parliament which, lacking the due dignity of an institution elected by the citizens, is willing to endorse these proposals.
In this regard, the Members of the Bonino List do not wish to support the Council' s strategy which continues to be hidden behind proposals which appear to be minimalist but which lay the foundations for a genuine European legal, criminal and procedural system, but a system which is also a police system, a system of European repression: a system built on Eurojust and the European public prosecutor, the European legal network, Europol and the task force of the heads of police, the corpus juris, the European Anti-Fraud Office, the conventions of mutual legal assistance, Enfopol etc., in this infinite bureaucratic web which is in itself antidemocratic.
Like Mrs Palacio, we hope that the provisional unit for judicial cooperation will soon cease to be provisional, but we Radical Members are not prepared to repeat our experience with Europol, when the establishment of the drugs unit led to the creation of a continually changing and expanding superbody which was out of the democratic control of national and European parliaments.
Ladies and gentlemen, are you sure that the European citizens, the national parliaments and you yourselves wish to pursue a functionalist strategy in the areas of justice and security, one of the pillars of democracy?
Are you not afraid that, when all is said and done, Europe will trample upon the freedoms and rights of the citizens rather than guaranteeing and increasing them?
We have tabled a single amendment to this report, calling upon the Council to define more clearly the European area of justice which it intends to develop and, in particular, the level of harmonisation of the rules of criminal and procedural law which it intends to achieve, the institutions and bodies which it intends to create and their powers and responsibilities and the type of cooperation to be established between them, the democratic control to be provided for and, finally, the rights and freedoms which will be guaranteed to citizens.
Only when the institutional model and the rules governing the European area of justice are clearly defined will it be possible for citizens and Parliament to express their opinions on the individual measures proposed by the Council.
Unless a course is set towards a specific objective which is clear for all, in our opinion, the Union is destined to go adrift both institutionally and democratically.
In view of these considerations, we Members of the Emma Bonino List, in the name of European liberal and democratic federalist values, will vote against this proposal and the related report.
We will also be voting against a number of other proposals and reports over the course of this part-session.
Mr President, I shall side with the small number of dissidents in warning against the ideas, plans and projects in this stream of reports on legal policy which are up for debate today, including Mrs Gebhardt' s report.
The explanatory statement is very precise in describing what is happening at the moment, namely that judicial cooperation is being institutionalised or, to put it more accurately, that there is a trend towards supranationalism in this area.
It is, as the report says very precisely, "a forerunner of a future European public prosecution service designed to strengthen the European Union' s judicial dimension in relation to criminal law" , and reference is made to the drafting of EU criminal law with attendant institutions, police service, prosecution service, administration of justice, etc. which, for example, were adopted in connection with Mr Wiebenga' s report in 1999.
In two areas, however, crucial mistakes are being made, first of all when it comes to the very process of making criminal law into a supranational affair.
Systems of criminal law are, of course, among the clearest cultural expressions of a society.
What we have here is a conflict of legal cultures, for there is not just one European criminal law and not just one European ideology relating to crime policy. There are fifteen of them.
By incorporating - or institutionalising - these projects into the European Union' s various bureaucracies, an élite and non-transparent system arises which is, on many points, in conflict with elementary ideals relating to democracy and legal rights.
The second point is also interesting, of course.
A number of very crucial initiatives are undoubtedly being taken towards establishing a United States of Europe.
Interestingly enough, the heading reads: "The establishment of Eurojust as a means of upholding the rule of law."
What rule of law is being talked about here?
Has the EU become a State?
Yes, it is on the way to becoming one, for the ambition, as expressed so clearly in the last paragraph of the first part of the explanatory statement, is precisely that the European Union must establish "independent legislative, executive and judiciary" bodies "with counterbalancing powers" , that is to say the hallmarks of a State.
For both these reasons, my own group cannot be expected to cooperate.
Mr President, the world' s largest common legal area is on the way to becoming a reality.
It must be founded upon common values and have broad political support.
The proposal to set up an initial provisional Eurojust unit is largely to be welcomed.
In this way, the Council has taken a first step towards institutionalising the process of judicial cooperation, something which the Group of the European People' s Party and European Democrats has been demanding for a long time.
It is essential, if the rule of law is to be upheld, for judicial cooperation in criminal matters to be developed in line with the competences of Europol.
By strengthening the fight against serious organised crime, Eurojust is therefore a logical step in the efforts to provide citizens with a high level of safety within an area of freedom, security and justice.
The provisional unit' s main tasks ought to be that of ensuring better coordination between the national prosecution authorities and that of supporting criminal investigations in cases involving organised crime.
In view of the proposed unit' s remit, there must be close and clearly regulated cooperation with Europol in order to avoid duplication of effort and conflicts over the respective responsibilities of those involved.
Setting up the provisional unit is only a first step.
The rapporteur appreciates that setting up the second stage Eurojust ought to be that much easier in the light of the experience gained, which is a view I share.
Moving subsequently towards setting up a European public prosecution authority is another question to discuss.
I see the role of a future European public prosecutor as being precisely and solely that of combating fraud affecting the EU' s financial interests.
In view of the subsidiarity principle, I am therefore opposed to a common catalogue of criminal law and to the EU as a common judicial body in all criminal law - if anyone should happen to see any such development as being of topical relevance right now.
What Parliament has to adopt a position on today is vigorous judicial cooperation for the purpose of combating serious organised crime.
This is a positive development, and it is therefore gratifying that there should be so much support for it in Parliament.
I am particularly pleased about the initiative to strengthen the protection of personal data.
I would congratulate Mrs Gebhardt on a good piece of work.
I want to conclude by pointing out something I think we ought not to forget.
Without a certain degree of cooperation, it is simply not possible for us to uphold a law-governed society in an EU with freedom of movement.
If we wish to see crime combated more efficiently, then we must also strengthen the protection of human rights, something which must be founded upon our common legal principles.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, Mrs Gebhardt deserves our congratulations on the excellent report she has presented, dealing with one of the decisions taken at the Tampere Council.
Her criticism that, considering the development of police cooperation, the issue of judicial cooperation should have been tackled earlier on is fair, particularly bearing in mind the enormous scale that organised and cross-border crime have reached and that this requires rapid, joint, concerted action.
The creation of Eurojust is part of the European action for fighting organised crime which seeks to strengthen and guarantee the balanced development of police and judicial cooperation in the European Union.
The proposal that we have before us today, that a provisional unit for judicial cooperation should be established, must therefore be considered to be the first stage in the process of creating Eurojust.
Its actions will have to improve positive and close cooperation between the competent national authorities for investigating and instituting legal proceedings when two or more Member States are involved and when the case requires joint action.
The national legislation of each Member State will be respected throughout.
The experience gained in running this provisional unit will serve as a basis for the drafting of the decision that will lead to the creation of Eurojust.
With regard to the increase in Europol' s powers that we all wish to see, Parliament has drawn attention to the need to ensure that democratic control is exercised.
Eurojust must work, on this point too, with greater jurisdictional control.
Commissioner Vitorino ended the previous debate by drawing attention to the initiative that is now underway for a measure seeking to communitise EUROPOL: we look forward most keenly to the presentation of this proposal so that we can state our opinion.
Mr President, I would very quickly like to begin by thanking Mrs Gebhardt for her excellent report and by saying that the Commission endorses almost all of the points that have fuelled her reflections.
I will take the opportunity - since several Members have raised very delicate issues - to tell you quite frankly that, as Mr Coelho has just said, we primarily view this initiative as an opening initiative that demonstrates the political will of the Council to make up the ground lost in the field of judicial cooperation in comparison to police cooperation.
I say to you quite candidly that I fail to understand how this initiative for judicial cooperation at the level of Eurojust can be seen as an attack on, or a threat to, the guaranteeing and protection of fundamental rights.
It has to be said that either we subscribe to the democratic model with which we are familiar, one based on the division of powers, and one which recognises that the courts have supreme authority when it comes to guaranteeing individual rights, and we acknowledge that European judicial cooperation in criminal matters consists precisely of reinforcing coordination between European courts in their capacity of protectors of fundamental rights - and this is the model to which I personally subscribe - or we can choose not to subscribe to this model and, in that case, I fail to understand how one can see this initiative for developing a common judicial area as posing any threat to guarantees on fundamental rights.
Let us be quite clear about this.
We are not in the process of harmonising European criminal law with a sledgehammer.
What the Tampere Summit required us to do was to adopt, with a view to combating cross-border crime, transnational rules in areas where it is recognised that the transnationality, or if you like the supranationality, of legal instruments constitutes added value in terms of combating illegal and criminal acts that are supranational by nature.
Criminals must be left in no doubt as to this supranationality.
That is why when we were asked at Tampere for common rules in the field of indictment and penalties for crimes against the environment, drug trafficking, trafficking in human beings, child pornography, terrorism or Internet crime, it was because it was recognised that these were types of supranational criminal activities which had to be dealt with using supranational instruments.
However, since with Eurojust we are talking about the coordination of national public prosecutors and judges in order to combat all forms of serious crime - and on this point I agree with the approach taken by the rapporteur - this concept is being enlarged: we are no longer talking solely about cooperation on purely transnational crimes, but also about cooperating to counteract criminal activities.
Such would be the case, for example, with a criminal who commits a crime in one Member State and then seeks refuge in another Member State, as their crime has been a serious one.
We are therefore entering the realms of the fight against legal insecurity in global terms, but are doing so with respect not only for substantive laws, but also for national procedural laws.
That implies the actions taken by every judge being in line with their national legal systems and jurisdiction for acting against and combating this type of crime falling within the national legal framework of each Member State.
It is for this reason that I fail to see in this the advent of a 'Big Brother' -style European judicial system.
I do not even see in it - unfortunately, I might add - the advent of a European public prosecutor, because as you know, the Commission has proposed creating the office of European public prosecutor, but not in this context or to deal with these matters.
The Commission' s proposal was highly targeted and was submitted to the appropriate body: the Intergovernmental Conference.
What was it that the Commission proposed?
The creation of the office of European public prosecutor in order to guarantee protection of the European Community' s financial interests.
In this area we can indeed talk of a European public prosecutor.
But as concerns Eurojust, this is a network for coordinating the actions of national judges and public prosecutors with the objective of enhancing capabilities for combating types of serious crime at European level.
And this is why I also see in this an important tool for ensuring judicial control of Europol.
It was, in fact, made quite clear at Tampere that Eurojust would be Europol' s judicial counterpart.
That means that investigations and criminal proceedings that can count on the involvement of Europol must be flanked and followed up by Eurojust, acting as a network of judges and public prosecutors at European level.
It is for this reason that the mutual relationships between Eurojust, Europol and OLAF, in its role as a specialist body for combating fraud, and the existing European judicial network must be clearly defined.
The Commission welcomes your report, Mrs Gebhardt.
I hope that Parliament will adopt it.
We will have the opportunity to make our commitment to this provisional unit from 1 January 2001, but the Commission wants to sustain the debate on the form that the definitive Eurojust unit will take.
That is why we will be presenting to the Council and European Parliament a proposal for a Communication on the definitive judicial cooperation unit, in order to have as swiftly as possible an outline, a foretaste, of what the definitive version of the Eurojust network will look like.
Thank you, Commissioner.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.
FAIR Programme
The next item on the agenda is the report (A5-0310/2000) by Mrs Langenhagen, on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control, on the Special Report No 9/99 concerning research activities in the field of agriculture and fisheries (FAIR Programme - Fisheries, Agriculture and Agro-Industrial Research), together with the Commission' s replies [C5-0227/2000 - 2000/2133(COS)]
Mr President, Commissioner, in two days' time in this House we will be addressing another weighty matter, the Annual Report of the Court of Auditors on the 1999 budget year, the first budget which covers, at least in part, the term of office of the new Commission.
While, with this annual report, the new Commission will quite clearly be held accountable and will need to be reminded of its duty, the FAIR Programme is, as it were, unfinished business from a bygone era.
The FAIR Programme - Fisheries, Agriculture and Agro-Industrial Research - was part of the fourth Framework Programme which ran from 1994 to 1998.
In that time, a total of EUR 660 million of Community funds was spent on the FAIR Programme, admittedly a small amount when compared with the overall budget of the fourth Framework Programme of over EUR 11.8 billion, but an amount which is, nonetheless, worthy of investigation.
I mentioned that the FAIR Programme investigated in the Court of Auditors' special report was unfinished business from the past.
One could argue that there was no need at all for Parliament to deal with these outdated issues any more, because - so people say - the new Commission is of course doing everything better in any case.
However, I cannot accept such an argument.
After all, as representatives of the people of Europe, we have a supervisory role which we must exercise so as to remain credible.
Part of this is, of course, also ex post evaluation, even if, in this case, it has definitely come rather late.
When I was drawing up my report, I held numerous conversations with both the Court of Auditors and the Commission, and I also brought all the parties together around one table.
At this - what I would call - mini 'trialogue' there was an open and fair discussion.
My questions were answered satisfactorily.
All sides gave their honest opinions - in my view - without falling back on inflexible opposing positions.
I observed a constructive atmosphere with the transparency and flexibility which is so often called for, and in no sense was it reminiscent of two armoured tortoises facing each other without saying a word.
I believe that it is certainly possible to speak of a new culture of cooperation which was put into practice here for the first time.
I would expressly thank the Court of Auditors and the Commission for this.
The attitude of those being inspected towards their inspectors has taken a turn for the better.
Inspections are, of course, not carried out for their own sake either, but to achieve an improvement.
I would say that, at the end of the day, we are, of course, all acting in unison, the inspectors and those being inspected, and why?
So as to ensure that European money is better deployed in the future.
Overall then, this is a balanced and fairly argued report.
Nevertheless, there are some points which are mentioned which I must criticise.
However, at the same time, I would express the hope that the Commission will respect its commitments and that it has made the appropriate improvements in the fifth Framework Programme.
What are my main criticisms?
Firstly, the length of the overall inspection procedure. As it stands at the moment it is unacceptable.
I say this quite clearly and you are aware of this.
It is simply impossible that two full years should go by between the investigation beginning and the report being submitted to Parliament.
Surely some relevance to the present situation has to be retained.
This has nothing to do with carrying out the controls themselves, they take time, but it is to do with the contradictory procedure and possibly also with publication.
There is therefore a need for action to be taken.
A procedure urgently needs to be identified which will allow the special report to be published within a reasonable period of time.
My question to the Commission in this regard highlighted some possibilities, but unfortunately no usable result has yet emerged.
Given the importance of the research programme for agriculture and fisheries, it is regrettable that some problems were identified in connection with the organisation of the programme.
For example, the descriptions of the selection criteria remain unclear and their application inconsistent, with the result that it was sometimes impossible to understand why projects had been selected for funding.
In addition, there were mistakes in the certified expenditure and insufficient sanctions, as well as links between experts and some of the organisations involved in the research proposals which, in my view, need to be queried.
Above all, however, it must be pointed out that the cooperation between the Directorates-General involved - Fisheries, Agriculture and Research - was unsatisfactory and needs to be more efficiently structured in the future.
I nonetheless assume, not least with a view to my hobbyhorse of fisheries, that we will put pressure on all three of them together so that we can guarantee positive developments in the future.
Mr President, the Fisheries Committee report was rather brief, in any case.
The problems that arose in spending were not of too much concern to the Fisheries Committee; other areas were of greater concern.
The Court of Auditors produced a constructive and reasonable report, but when we had the discussion in committee and teased out the problems and heard the explanations we were a bit more satisfied that the problems that arose were not foreseeable and were correctable.
I remember that there was a very large number of projects involved.
The amount of money is not insignificant - EUR 600 million - but, nevertheless, there were around 600 projects involved which spread the money quite thin and made it quite difficult for the limited staff and resources that the Commission had at the time to monitor carefully exactly what was going on.
Like so many other sections of the budget, something like 80% of the entire spending involved public bodies of one sort or another within the Member States.
This money was not just being thrown out to industry, although some of it was.
A lot of this spending was supervised by Member States.
We welcome the fact that there is a change in the policy under the new programme, moving from giving the money into the care of the policy-making Directorate-General to giving it to people who are engaged in research.
We can expect a more constructive approach to research when it is done by people interested in research rather than by people who administer the policies, as in the case of agriculture.
Generally speaking, we thank the rapporteur for drawing attention to the problems involved and look forward to the re-organised programme being more effective and more satisfactory.
Mr President, I welcome this report by Mrs Langenhagen, the contents of which I am very happy to endorse.
The Court of Auditors' report on the FAIR Programme, from which the rapporteur' s report arises, was only published in March this year even though the sector letters regarding the audit were first sent to the Commission in December 1998 and February 1999.
As the rapporteur suggested, this is simply unacceptable.
It is too long a delay and undermines the relevance of Parliament' s work in considering such reports.
This delay results from the contradictory procedure between the Court and the Commission which precedes the publication of every Court of Auditors' report, whereby the Commission has the right to have its reply published at the same time as the report.
As a result of the delay in this case the rapporteur quite rightly questions the continuation of the contradictory procedure in its current form.
This is something I will certainly be exploring in the report I will be bringing to Parliament in December.
It is sufficient to suggest that we need to look at the whole procedure again, not just in terms of the Court' s annual report which will be published tomorrow, but also in terms of special reports such as this one.
The Court of Auditors' report found a number of significant problems with the management of the FAIR Programme during 1994 to 1998, including a lack of quantified objectives for the programme, making it difficult to fully measure the results, insufficient transparency in selection and evaluation procedures and the management of measures under the programme by three DGs.
This meant that the management of the programme lacked clarity and homogeneity.
We hope that as a result of the reform of the Commission currently taking place we will see a huge correction of this in future.
That we do not have clear targets, that we cannot measure output, is really unacceptable and would not happen in any other institution.
This is very old hat.
We know the change is coming, but we want to see it very quickly.
One problem which remains is the EUR 3.4 million still to be recovered, 92% of which is accounted for by three files which have been under examination by the Commission' s legal services since July 1996 and August 1997 and whose due dates have expired.
It is vital that the Commission follows that and gets its money back.
We will be following this report' s recommendations in future so we encourage the Commission to put things right as soon as possible, otherwise you will see reference to this and other special reports within discharge procedure reports.
Mr President, I should very much like to congratulate Mrs Langenhagen on her report.
I think that, in every way, Mrs Langenhagen has provided a clear description of the very major problems there have been in putting the FAIR Programmes into effect and, at the same time, in also checking up on how the programmes were operating.
In that connection, I should like to make it clear that, in view of the very great degree of expertise possessed by the Commission, we cannot accept that so many of the things we adopted in the decisions have not been implemented.
On behalf of the Committee on Fisheries, I should like to call attention to a fairly small number of points.
Before new programmes are put into effect, the previous programmes ought to be assessed.
With the help of the scientific research which is, of course, an important part of our policies - in this case, fisheries policy - a prior assessment needs to be carried out of what is wanted and of how the resources are used, so that existing resources can continually be adapted to catch techniques and catch opportunities.
Against the background of what has happened, those of us in the Committee on Fisheries also believe that, whenever three Directorates-General are to coordinate and direct actions, it ought to be completely clear which Directorate-General is ultimately in control, with responsibility for putting matters into effect.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I should like to congratulate the rapporteur very warmly on this report.
I believe that it is very fair and very restrained and has turned out to be very balanced, and accordingly it did, of course, also receive the unanimous support of the Committee.
I should just like to touch on a few points which are, in my opinion, decisive for the future work of monitoring research in general.
In this regard, it seems to me important to listen to what our draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Fisheries said, which was that, at the end of the day, it is impossible to carry out a clear inspection in the interests of the taxpayers whom we represent and to monitor efficiency if no clear objectives are defined beforehand.
This seems to me to be one of the main criticisms made in the Court of Auditors' report.
Quite simply, this makes it difficult to measure the efficiency of the programme.
My second point concerns the hierarchy of staff with powers of authorisation. Here, Commissioner, overlaps which are actually unacceptable have occurred.
In Paragraph 59 in the Court of Auditors' report, this is illustrated relatively clearly.
If someone who is entitled to authorise payments and who has allocated 98% of the appropriations available in 1996 is made subordinate to the dossier manager, then this leads to an impossible situation.
The Commission' s official reply to this in the file, that there was another Director-General involved, is extremely lame.
After all, I do not believe that anyone who has anything to do with financial management and also with financial control would be able to accept an answer of this kind.
I hope, Commissioner, that where the reform of the Commission is concerned, to which Mrs Morgan has already referred, we will not only attach importance to reforming the Financial Regulation, but also, and above all, to implementing the existing Financial Regulation in full.
The Financial Regulation is very wisely conceived and it provides for everything to be kept wonderfully separate, but in practice they must not be mixed up, and this seems to have been the case here.
Commissioner, in the near future - and then also with the work of the new Commission in mind - we will have to deal with further Court of Auditors' reports or audit reports, such as the one on the Joint Research Centre, which has turned out to be very critical, but also the special audit report on a very unusual contract with a consultancy firm.
I hope that we will then also see a desire to actually make improvements in the areas mentioned by Mrs Langenhagen.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, thank you for the importance that you have attached to the Court of Auditors' special report on the FAIR Programme.
I would particularly like to thank Mrs Langenhagen for her very constructive report, along with the members of the Committee on Budgetary Control, and of the Committee on Fisheries and notably the rapporteur, Mr Busk.
You have underscored, and I would thank you for this, the spirit underlying this report, in your dialogue with the Court of Auditors and the Commission' s services and in the value you attached to it.
As you have also said, the FAIR Programme formed part of the Fourth Framework Programme.
It had come to an end by the time I took up my duties as Commissioner, but it is the responsibility of the present Commission, and my responsibility as Commissioner, to ensure that the lessons learned from your work are turned to good account and to respond to the Court of Auditors' recommendations on this issue.
The report will play its part in the appraisal of the way the situation is developing and of working practices.
I must nevertheless emphasise that no instances of fraud or misappropriation have been detected.
It is important to point this out, as these things can sometimes be misinterpreted.
It is important to express ourselves clearly vis-à-vis the outside world.
As you have emphasised, the FAIR Programme is financed to the tune of 739 million euros.
It has given rise to over 3 300 proposals, more than 600 of which have received funding.
The FAIR Programme was also swiftly called into action at the start of the 'mad cow' crisis and a European action plan on transmissible spongiform encephalopathies was launched in the very same year following a call for proposals.
My point is that it has played a beneficial role in addressing a number of issues.
What were the questions asked, and what improvements have already been made?
I would like to highlight some of the latter, which have already been incorporated into the Fifth Framework Programme, in line with the Court' s recommendations.
First of all, you should know that responsibility for managing agricultural research has been transferred to the Agriculture DG and the Research DG, following the reorganisation of the Commission' s services, which has resulted in a degree of uniformity in the Agriculture DG' s research procedures.
The same may not apply to research in the field of fisheries, but it has been the case with agriculture.
Next, to ensure smooth coordination, a management group has been set up to ensure better coordination between the implementation of research programmes and the relevant Directorates-General with responsibility for other policies.
Thirdly, the Commission has adopted a common procedure for the evaluation of research proposals applicable to all the specific programmes, which can be consulted by the public in the common manual of evaluation procedures.
A common, transparent database of experts has been established to evaluate proposals and special efforts have been made to ensure the independence of experts in respect of the evaluation of proposals.
A common research database has been established.
The new type of research contract now sets out in detail all the financial and administrative considerations, with more clearly-defined responsibilities for participants and a better-documented negotiation procedure.
The Commission has also significantly increased the number of audits conducted, with this number rising by 25% annually over recent years.
These are the measures that have been envisaged under the Fifth Framework Programme and which are to be implemented.
However, as soon as I took up office, I also took an initiative to set up an informal working party which looked into the issue of simplifying and improving procedures, and I have already had an opportunity to talk about this before the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy.
This shows that the Commission has not been idle and that it is acting on the comments that you have made.
One has to be aware of the way the situation is developing, and remain vigilant, because it is difficult to attain perfection in this matter.
This is all the more true given that the report brought to light a number of issues that called for improvements, as you have emphasised.
I will take up on some of these issues, and let you have our opinion on these.
With regard to the annual monitoring of research programmes, which provides an independent opinion on the stage reached in, and the quality of, the implementation of our programmes, we have developed several measures aimed at improvement: an analysis of research management practices within the context of national and European Union programmes, with a view to exchanges of good practices and the promotion of mutual learning; the financing of studies aimed at assessing the socio-economic impact of the framework programme and the launching of pilot schemes aimed at evaluating the impact of completed projects, as you have, moreover, just emphasised in speaking of the need to gauge this impact.
Like the Commission, Parliament is of the opinion that joint responsibility for the implementation of the projects is closely akin to a joint financial responsibility.
I would nevertheless like to stress one thing, which is that joint financial responsibility cannot, in a strict sense, be envisaged within the context of the framework programme, the aim of which is to set up consortia composed of various bodies, universities, SMEs, large companies, and public or private research institutes.
These entities will not be able to take adequate financial precautions from among their own ranks, and in the case of the SMEs cannot necessarily be held liable for the insolvency of other members of the consortium.
It is clear that this consortium approach does not establish a duality in terms of joint financial responsibility.
This is a complex matter and one of the issues for which we must clearly find a way of ensuring greater security, but we must avoid this resulting in the exclusion from the framework programme of SMEs and public institutions who are fearful of having to accept responsibilities that they are unable to assume.
We thus need not only to strike the right balance in terms of joint financial responsibility but also, furthermore, to avoid scaring off potential partners in a consortium, the only participants in which will therefore be established bodies, when what we want is to foster the participation of small and medium-sized businesses.
On the other hand, I share your views entirely on the need to minimise the risk of double financing.
In this regard, you should know that in connection with point 74 of the White Paper on Reform, the Commission' s services are already in the process of introducing a central register of contracts concluded by the Commission, which will subsequently be linked to all the Commission' s financial information systems.
You have evidently raised other issues too, including the problem that Mrs Langenhagen referred to in her introduction: the time that has elapsed between the sector letters being sent and the report being debated in Parliament, the length of which can be attributed to the working relations between the Commission and the Court of Auditors.
As you have emphasised, all this happened several years ago, but it is clear that lessons must be learned from this exercise.
Since that time, measures have been taken regarding the internal organisation of our services in order to speed up, within the limits of the possible, the Court' s sector letter procedure.
It is perfectly clear that these dialogues are necessary and there is clearly a joint responsibility here; it is also up to the Court to enter into these dialogues, but I can, in any case, assure you that both the Court and the Commission' s services, along with Parliament, share the same commitment to progress in terms of resolving these problems.
I will now turn to the question that Mrs Morgan asked concerning the recovery of amounts.
There are a total of 3.4 million euros outstanding. This may seem a substantial sum, but it in fact only represents 0.3% of total financing under the programme.
This does not mean, of course, that this sum should not be recovered, and we must strive to do so.
I can tell you, in this respect, that the Commission' s services have done everything within their power to recover the amounts in question, but the services responsible embarked on the appropriate legal procedures two years ago.
Legal proceedings have now begun concerning two of the three files examined by the Commission' s legal service, since these have been referred to the national courts.
The process is therefore under way, but we are now entering the domain of Member State jurisdiction and cannot always dictate how long things will take.
I would nevertheless stress that the three files that I have just mentioned represent 92% of the total amount.
We have therefore worked very hard to recover the 3.4 million euros, and one could say that we are over 90% of the way there.
Turning to the question concerning fisheries, and the person responsible for their control, I have just been given an answer.
It has been assigned to the most appropriate level.
As far as the Agriculture DG is concerned, the problem has been resolved by transferring the relevant team to the Directorate-General for Research.
This has made for a smoother coordination of policies.
These are the answers to your questions.
There are still some new applications to put into practice, and I would like to take this opportunity to outline the guidelines on Community research that we would like to develop for the next framework programme, and which the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy has already examined, since I sent a policy paper to this Parliamentary Committee on 4 October, and it is to draw up a report.
There are several factors in these broad guidelines that will make for a considerable lightening of bureaucratic burdens: the switch from a project-based approach to a programme-based approach, the setting of minimum sizes for projects, the externalisation of a number of activities, such as exploratory premiums for small and medium-sized enterprises, mobility grants and, in general terms, a simplification of these procedures.
Substantial changes must also be introduced into the next framework programme.
We will see what the impact of the modifications made to the fifth Framework Programme has been and I would like to thank you for showing such commitment to improvement.
The Commission shares this commitment, and I would like to hope that we can work in the best possible atmosphere to carry through this research programme, which is essential at European level, but which must be implemented in conformity with the most stringent of rules on efficiency and on financial control.
Thank you, Commissioner.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.
(The sitting was closed at 8.00 p.m.)
Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting
The Minutes of yesterday' s sitting have been distributed.
Are there any comments?
Madam President, this is a small amendment to the Minutes.
In the modification of the agenda for Thursday the subject of the British submarine in Gibraltar was discussed and there were three speakers.
The speeches by Mr Poettering and Mr Barón Crespo are faithfully recorded in the Minutes, showing that one requested and the other granted the political agreement from the Group of the Europe People' s Party for it to be included in the agenda for December.
But there was a third speech, by Mr Galeote Quecedo, which does not feature in the Minutes.
Only his name is given.
Allow me to give an explanation.
This omission reflects fears, which in our opinion are unjustified, about anyone objectively reading the motion for a resolution that we are tabling, and this makes us fear that there could be further concealment in December.
But, this is just an explanation.
What I am asking for, with all due respect, is for Mr Galeote Quecedo' s speech to feature in the minutes.
Thank you, Mr Aparicio Sánchez.
We shall add Mr Galeote Quecedo' s statement to the Minutes.
Madam President, some of us expected an announcement from the chair yesterday about the Sakharov Prize - to whom it had been awarded, what the voting figures were and when it would be presented in plenary.
Could you give us some information about that, either today or as soon as possible?
Mr Bethell, your point has nothing to do with the approval of the Minutes but I can, however, readily inform you that the Conference of Presidents voted to give this year' s Sakharov Prize to the 'Basta Ya' association.
The prize will be awarded to the 'Basta Ya' association in the course of the December part-session.
(The Minutes were approved)
Charter of Fundamental Rights
The next item is the recommendation by Mr Duff and Mr Voggenhuber, on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs, on approval of the draft Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union (A5-0325/00).
Madam President, as a member of the European Parliament from Salzburg, allow me to start by thanking you for your words of acknowledgement and comfort yesterday.
When the memorial service of what was the worst disaster to befall my country over recent years is held in Salzburg Cathedral on Friday, I know that this Parliament will be among the mourners and I thank you for your words of sympathy and comfort for the relatives.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, after nine months' work and a long struggle for consensus, we now have a draft European Charter of Fundamental Rights.
Today is the day we have to say 'yes' or 'no' to this Charter and your rapporteurs recommend that plenary adopt and vote in favour of this Charter of Fundamental Rights.
This recommendation is born of a firm conviction.
Like many of you, I too regret that we are only allowed to say yes or no and are unable to send the Council any other political message which might have been called for in this context in order to express the critical support of this House for the Charter of Fundamental Rights, which is but a first step and is still a far cry from what Parliament demanded of this political project in March of this year.
What we must also remember here is what gives this Charter its value, assuming that it is adopted.
I think that it grants one initial fundamental right, one unwritten fundamental right and that is people's right to know their rights.
This fundamental right has now been granted.
Vague formulations and legal principles have given way to a clear system of fundamental rights which is binding on all the EU institutions and whenever European law is applied by the Member States.
The value of this Charter is that it has transformed rights vested in international law - vested but not binding, vested but not enforceable, vested but not guaranteed - into legal principles, nay into the constitutional principles of the Union itself, setting up a dynamic process which will surely end one day with a legally binding Charter of Fundamental Rights.
What has revolutionised the debate and the history of fundamental and human rights is that, for the first time, social rights have been listed in this Charter on a par with traditional human rights and traditional principles; no Member State has ever done that in its list of fundamental rights.
This Charter is also the expression of a common set of basic values for all the candidate countries, for all the countries wishing to join the European Union, and it is precisely in the area of social rights that it sends candidate countries a clear message that they must comply with these social standards.
It marks - and I am firmly convinced of this, even if many Heads of State and Government prefer not to admit it - the beginning of the constitutional process which this Parliament has called for so often and with such persistence.
I am certain that, with this Charter of Fundamental Rights, we have laid the foundation stone for a future European constitution and constitutional process.
I think that is reason enough for us to adopt this Charter, even though there are points at which it may be hard to accept that many rights, many basic rights which Parliament demanded for the people of Europe, and with good cause, have been left out of the Charter.
It is hard to see why the right to a fair wage has been left out and why we came up against insurmountable resistance when it came to the right to a decent minimum standard of living, the right to work and the right to housing.
This Charter will, I think, need to be supplemented in the future, if it is to become the foundation stone of a European constitution.
But that should not deter us from taking this first decisive step.
I hope that, even though it can only say yes to this Charter of Fundamental Rights, Parliament will clearly apprise the Council of its demand for this Charter to be made legally binding over coming weeks, so that it can open the way to the European Court of Justice for the citizens of Europe.
I hope that this House will emphasise these demands by a large majority in its resolution on Nice.
That is all I have to say. I should just like, if you will allow, firstly to thank my co-rapporteur for his committed approach and the vast amount of remarkable work which he carried out and secondly, to thank you for your support.
Madam President, whatever one felt about the mandate from the Cologne European Council, it was fairly surprising that the convention set up to draft the Charter fully succeeded in achieving the mandate.
We faced an extraordinarily complex task for the inscription of fundamental rights and freedoms found inside the constitutional traditions of Member States and also within the general principles of Union law.
In my opinion the convention managed to strike a sound balance between self-restraint and aspiration.
We refrained from superseding the Treaties but maximised their impact by making the relationship between the citizen and the Union for the first time clear and visible.
Some people will be disappointed that the Charter was unable to go further but it is of course a compromise forged in the crucible of the convention and it represents a balance between competing political tendencies, nationalities and cultures.
That balance commanded a broad consensus inside the convention and should do so too inside the European Parliament.
Parliament played a strong part is formulating the Charter.
We profited from participating strongly in the process and the citizens we represent will profit from its solemn proclamation especially as Article 52.3 says the Union can then proceed to grant more extensive protection of European fundamental rights as European integration proceeds.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, first of all I should like to join the European Parliament in expressing the Presidency' s sympathies on the occasion of the accident which occurred near Salzburg in Austria, and say that we fully share in the sorrow of the families of the victims of this most serious accident.
I am particularly pleased to have this opportunity to address the House as part of an in-depth debate on this fine project to establish a Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union before Parliament adopts its final position on this text.
Admittedly, we have already exchanged views on this matter on two occasions, firstly on 3 October, following an oral question from the Chairman of your Committee on Constitutional Affairs, Giorgio Napolitano, and then on 24 October, when I came to Parliament to present the results of the informal European Council in Biarritz on 13 and 14 October, where, indeed, the Charter was one of the major items on the agenda.
For all that, however, today' s debate, in my opinion, is a far cry from being needless repetition.
It is, on the contrary, particularly important as today Parliament is to decide if, as is urged by the conclusions of the Cologne Council, it is going to proclaim this text, jointly with the Council and the Commission, at the European Council meeting in Nice, which is less than a month away now.
This is quite clearly a major political decision and a fresh opportunity to show the citizens of Europe the whole scope of this initiative.
I understand that the position advocated by your Committee on Constitutional Affairs - and let me congratulate the Committee' s rapporteurs, Mr Duff and Mr Voggenhuber, who have just spoken - urges you to adopt the text of the Charter as it stands and, therefore, to mandate your President to proclaim the Charter on behalf of Parliament in Nice, alongside the Presidents of the Council and of the Commission.
As you know, this position is in line with that adopted by the Heads of State and Government at the Biarritz European Council who unanimously and unreservedly approved the Charter, and I can only urge you, therefore, on behalf of the Council, to follow suit, perhaps giving you a few reasons to do so.
The Council Presidency sees this Charter as symbolising a twofold success.
A success, in the first place, in terms of the method adopted: that of a body, the Convention, made up of Members of the European Parliament, national parliaments, the European Commission - and let me take this opportunity to greet Mr Vitorino, who brought all his competence to bear - and of personal representatives of the Heads of State and Government, the whole body subject to the enlightened chairmanship of Mr Roman Herzog, the former President of both the Karlsruhe Court and the Federal Republic of Germany.
I feel that the diversity and the quality of the appointed Members represented an unquestionable asset.
I find similarly extraordinary the twofold concern which the Convention had - to work with the utmost transparency and interaction with the public, particularly through the Internet.
So, with a concern for openness which paid off in the end, in the course of its work the Convention heard from the major European non-governmental organisations, both sides of industry in Europe and, importantly, too, for the future, the candidate countries.
This transparency and openness actively contributed to the gradual improvement of the various versions of the draft Charter and enabled the final version to be the right one.
I know that the Convention experiment already clearly appears to be one of the avenues - one, but not the only avenue - which Europe could follow up in future in order to be more transparent and in touch with the opinions of European citizens.
Members of the European Parliament, particularly in our previous debate, have already expressed the wish to repeat the experiment.
I, personally, have no doubt that such an opportunity will present itself.
The second and main success, is the result which the Convention achieved.
The Charter is primarily - and this is rare enough to be worthy of note, as I have seen particularly in the preparations for the IGC - a clear and well-organised document.
Combining around fifty articles, which, in fact, makes for a short text, subdivided into six chapters with titles that ring true, and could perhaps be a new motto for Europe: dignity, freedoms, equality, solidarity, citizens' rights, justice, it unquestionably answers the requirements for concision and clarity and thus, also, the concerns and expectations of our fellow citizens.
So, the Charter is a perfectly consistent text.
The authors of the text managed to fulfil a twofold requirement that was not easy to satisfy: firstly, to avoid creating law out of nothing and, secondly, to give us a precise snapshot of the scope of fundamental rights in force within the European Union, while also giving us a dynamic picture with potential for further development.
I am convinced, however, that the Charter will make its mark most especially by the strength of its content.
Firstly, it precisely restates the fundamental rights laid down, in the main, in the European Convention on Human Rights.
In this respect, the authors of the Charter were careful throughout, as was also stipulated in the specification, to avoid any risk of conflict between the case law of the European Court of Human Rights, responsible for ensuring compliance with the Convention, and that of the European Court of Justice, in particular by adopting the wording used by the Council of Europe Convention when this seemed sufficiently finalised.
Similarly, in the general provisions, Article 52(3) stipulates that, insofar as the Charter contains rights which correspond to rights guaranteed by the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, "the meaning and scope of those rights shall be the same as those laid down by the said Convention."
It is my sincere opinion that in so doing, the authors of the text have with great precision minimalised as far as possible the risk of having conflicting case law in the two courts in Luxembourg and Strasbourg.
Moreover, at a time when we have just celebrated the 50th anniversary of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, I think we can safely leave it to the judges of both institutions to fuel and continue the dialogue they already maintain, which is undoubtedly adequate guarantee against any risk of the two-speed Europe of human rights that some people have mentioned.
Quite obviously, the Charter does not confine itself to merely restating pre-existing rights, with a little updating.
This would have been somewhat disappointing.
It also enshrines many new rights which are not included in the Convention and which are necessitated by developments in our societies, be it in terms of technological development, the emergence of new dependencies, or even the increasing complexity of our state and administrative systems.
It is particularly important that European citizens should know, for example, that the European Union prohibits all human cloning for reproductive purposes or that it guarantees its citizens protection of their personal data.
I am of course pleased to see, finally, the importance the text attaches to economic and social rights.
France argued forcefully for this section to be a substantial one, but it was also the will of many other Member States, the European Parliament and a good many Members of the national parliaments, which can only be gratifying to the Council Presidency.
At stake were the Charter' s innovatory strength and driving force as well as consolidation of the European social model, which we value so highly.
First of all, I must stress the importance of including a chapter entitled "Solidarity" .
Let me, once again, congratulate President Herzog in person, who, I believe, was behind this.
This value, this solidarity, is indeed what best sums up the European social model, which is consubstantial with the construction of the European Community.
This is the solidarity which the Charter guarantees through the right to free education, the right of workers to be informed and consulted, the right to collective bargaining and action, including the right to strike, even if it was not easy to get it included in the text, but also through the right to protection against unjustified dismissal, the right to social protection and the ban on children working.
I shall also stress Article 23, which is particularly clear in stipulating equality between men and women, and stating that this must be ensured in all areas, and that the principle of equality shall not prevent the adoption of measures providing for specific advantages in favour of the under-represented sex.
Overall, I should say that this text unquestionably marks the greatest collective advance in terms of affirming social rights, both because of the importance of the rights enshrined and also because these rights are included for the first time in the same text as civic and political rights, thereby officially signposting the indivisible nature of all fundamental rights.
It is true, nonetheless, that it has been possible to make a number of criticisms regarding the content of the Charter.
There are some, for example, who denounce the text as reflecting the political choices of those advocating a liberal Europe and criticise the obligation for consensus as the method adopted within the Convention for adopting the Charter.
These are criticisms put forward in a recently launched appeal from some Members of Parliament, especially Members of the European Parliament, calling for the Charter to be revised.
As to the method, let me remind you that the Convention itself determined its own rules of procedure, without any external pressure, and that the rule of consensus seemed to be a particularly constructive option in a body as diverse as the Convention.
I am sure the Convention members that are to speak here will be able to confirm that.
I feel that this decision has most certainly contributed towards producing a text which I believe to be well-balanced and ambitious.
The European Trade Union Confederation, for its part, saw fit to complain about what it considers to be some omissions, such as the lack of any reference to the right to a minimum income, for example.
I should therefore like to make a few things clear once again.
The purpose of the Charter was to collate the fundamental rights, not, at this stage, to form a social treaty - regrettable as that may be, and it may be something that will come in time - and the Convention' s mandate, as stipulated in the initial specification, did not entitle it to create completely new social rights out of nothing.
I am certain there will be further stages along this road.
Moreover, the Charter is not the only initiative launched by the French Presidency in the social field, quite the contrary.
Indeed, the French Presidency has set the promotion of a more mutually supportive Europe at the top of its priorities.
So, as you know, the Presidency, on the basis of the conclusions of the Lisbon Council, has launched the initiative of a social agenda, intended to determine what action the European Union will undertake in the next few years in order to take existing needs in to account, providing, in particular, a qualitative and quantitative improvement in employment, as well as greater social cohesion.
I feel that these two approaches, the Charter and the social agenda, complement each other and properly reflect our determination to place social matters at the heart of the construction of Europe.
I should, moreover, also like to point out some grounds for satisfaction for the Presidency, and I believe for other institutions too, in the overall position adopted by the European Trade Union Confederation, which stresses the connection between the Charter and the social agenda and which concludes that the Convention' s proposed Charter, adopted by the Heads of State and Government, "represents an important step towards the construction of a social and a citizens' Europe" .
I feel this is a significant statement - one that I welcome.
The Heads of State and Government were alive to this determination when they, if not adopted - that is still to come in Nice - at least approved the text of the Charter.
The balance arrived at by the authors has met with general approval, and the Presidency has no desire to reopen the debate, no more than, I believe, your rapporteurs do.
Let me now, in conclusion, turn to the matter of the legal status of the Charter, which has already been mentioned.
I clearly heard your rapporteurs once again expressing the desire to see the Charter form the preamble to a constitutional treaty and you know that I, personally, am in favour of this, but I should like to point out, because we are bound to be extremely precise regarding what is happening today, that the European Council in Biarritz was forced to note that the majority of Member States were not willing to discuss the matter of incorporating this Charter into the Treaties, at least for the time being.
I can assure you, then, since it will not be possible to pose this question officially until after Nice, that the French Presidency fully intends to strive to include this perspective in the conclusions of the Nice European Council.
The fact remains that several individuals, Members of the European Parliament in particular, have suggested that explicit reference to the Charter of Fundamental Rights be included in Article 6 of the Treaty on European Union, which already refers to the European Convention on Human Rights.
They have thus pointed out what is really a paradoxical situation, whereby the Treaty on European Union would not mention a new text actually belonging to the European Union even though it already refers to an existing text belonging to the Council of Europe.
You know that, in a personal capacity, I have shown my openness to this proposal, and even my support for it, and I would reiterate that here.
However, once again on the basis of its bilateral contacts, the Presidency is forced to acknowledge that several Member States do not wish to see this.
I should, moreover, like to inform the European Parliament that, on the initiative of the Presidency, a debate was held yesterday within the Preparatory Group for this issue.
They inform me that the discussion was not entirely conclusive, perhaps signifying that some of the governments might be inspired by a clear statement of views from the European Parliament as a whole.
I am convinced then, that this Charter, by virtue of its clarity, its coherence and its content, will come to the fore as the benchmark text which the European Union so badly needed.
I can only, therefore, on behalf of the Council Presidency, urge you once again to adopt the Charter of Fundamental Rights with a view to its joint official proclamation in Nice.
I am convinced that this will be one of the highlights of this European Council bringing the French Presidency to an end.
Madam President, Mr President-in-Office, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, one of the main tasks of the directly-elected members of the European Parliament, which represents the 370 million citizens of the European Union, is to bring the unifying structure of Europe closer to its people.
That is why it was so important and why Parliament was right not only to invest so much hope in a new Charter of Fundamental Rights for the European Union but also to help so intensively and constructively to bring it about.
It is a huge feather in this institution's cap - as is the fact that the groups stood side by side here - that we managed to secure 16 places for European Parliament representatives at the fundamental rights convention.
The result before us is proof positive of the fact that giving the European Parliament a say was the right move.
Allow me at this point to offer my warmest thanks and acknowledgement to those who represented us at the convention under the leadership of our fellow member, Mr Méndez de Vigo.
Ladies and gentlemen - and I mean everyone involved from the European Parliament - made a decisive contribution; as a result, the difficult instructions of the Cologne European Council were carried out successfully in a very short space of time and with the maximum possible attention.
I should like on behalf of our group to offer express thanks not only to all the members of our group but, most of all, to Vice-President Ingo Friedrich, who coordinated our work.
But our special thanks must go to all the members of the convention, especially its chairman, former president of the Federal Republic of Germany, Roman Herzog, to whom I should like at this point to wish a speedy recovery.
With the exception of the British delegation, our group unanimously supports the Charter.
The draft before us is a balanced text which has already been applauded on all sides as an example of European consensus.
Obviously, the Charter will not please everyone.
No compromise can.
But Europe will only progress and find its feet if we are all prepared to help bring about a good result.
And that is what has happened with the Charter of Fundamental Rights.
The Charter of Fundamental Rights has drawn on a multitude of European and national legal sources.
It pays homage to the spiritual, religious and moral heritage of our continent and to the indivisible, universal values of human dignity, freedom, equality and solidarity.
The Charter presented to us is based on the principles of democracy and the rule of law.
By placing the individual, people as individuals, at the heart of its activities, by establishing the citizenship of the union and by creating an area of freedom, security and justice, the Charter creates comprehensive transparency.
It clearly sets out our citizens' rights for them and clearly sets out the legal positions which the institutions, bodies and agencies of the European Union must comply with and respect when acting on behalf of the people of Europe.
The Charter before us is, to my mind, a huge success and may, as I read in one of the European broadsheets on 26 September 2000, become the calling card for Europe.
As I pointed out during discussions on how to handle the Charter henceforth during the plenary debate on the Biarritz EU summit of 3 October this year, what is at issue now is the future of the European Union from this point on.
In saying yes, we are instructing you, Madam President, to proclaim the Charter with the President of the European Council and the President of the European Commission at the EU summit in Nice in a few weeks' time.
Although, in our view, even this solemn act in Nice cannot but be a step along the way.
The European Union has long been more than an economic community.
If we, as the representatives and trustees of the citizens of the European Union and of Europe as a whole, wish to continue with the unification of our continent in an ambitious and committed manner, then the solemn proclamation cannot but be a first step along the way.
We in the European People's Party are jointly and firmly committed to including the Charter of Fundamental Rights in the Treaties as quickly as possible so that it can become a Charter of direct and unassailable rights for the people of the European Union.
Mr President-in-Office, you have taken a stand here and I hear what you are saying but let me say quite clearly on behalf of the European People's Party that we expect an ambitious result from Nice - an ambitious result on the conditions for enlargement of the European Union and an ambitious result for the Charter, which is why I again call on the Presidency of the Council, on behalf of the members of the European People's Party, to ensure that a timetable is drawn up for transposing the Charter of Fundamental Rights into the EU Treaties.
I wish the French Presidency every success here.
If you are successful, it will be a joint success for the European Parliament and all the people in the European Union.
(Applause)
Madam President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, in the history of European integration there are certain moments that can be considered as points of historic change, and this is one of them, because the adoption of the Charter by Parliament will be one more step towards realising the dreams and plans of the founding fathers.
I would like to remind you that the first time that the declaration of rights was discussed was at the Congress of Europe in The Hague in 1948, and that was the origin of the European Convention on Human Rights of the Council of Europe.
Now, as the European Union, we are once again affirming that this is a community of values.
We have given real substance to European citizenship, which is recognised in the Treaty on European Union, and we have consolidated our area, not only as an internal market, but also as a legal area in which fundamental human rights are recognised.
For socialists and social democrats from across Europe, the adoption of the Charter also represents the fulfilment of a commitment to our electorate; we contested the elections with a manifesto containing twenty-one priorities, and a fundamental one among them was to push for a European Charter of Rights in order to enshrine the fundamental civil, economic, social and cultural rights of the citizens of the Union.
The European Summit in Cologne, under the German Presidency of Chancellor Schröder, proposed specifically on the one hand, the outline, which became a Convention and, on the other hand, that this Charter should be drawn up.
It gave the Convention a mandate and nominated a former President of Germany, Roman Herzog, as chairman of this body.
I think that this needs to be highlighted today because the work that we have carried out is not the exclusive property of any political family, and this gesture does credit to the German Presidency at the time and shows that we all need to move forward together in achieving fundamental values.
I think that we have also done this in the European Parliament.
I have had the opportunity to express my admiration for the work carried out by Íñigo Méndez de Vigo, as chairman of the European Parliament delegation.
I would also like to point out the crucial role played by my colleague Mrs Pervenche Berès, when she led the delegation from the Group of the Party of European Socialists.
I think that we can all be proud of this success, which is a shared one.
Today Europe is more than just a common market, and what is more we have a fundamental piece of what should be a future constitution.
However, despite all the efforts that have been made, there is still a fundamental step that we need to take in order to feel satisfied - and I say this thinking about the Nice Summit - which is the last point mentioned by the President-in-Office of the Council: the inclusion of the Charter in Article 6 of the Treaty.
I think that, apart from the repeated personal support of the President-in-Office of the Council, there is a series of factors in favour of this.
Currently, the majority of Heads of State and Government belong to our political family.
Others do not, but they are in favour of this inclusion and of a reformed and democratic Europe.
The Charter provides the Union with an essential legitimacy as a community of values, and we need to emphasise this, because we have also experienced events that show that Article 7 needs to have a much more solid support.
Our governments need to obtain tangible results in Nice that they can offer to our citizens - institutional matters are important but, as the President-in-Office of the Council and the Commissioner are well aware, they are difficult to sell to public opinion.
The Charter also sets out the Copenhagen criteria, which we consider to be fundamental in the membership negotiations.
I would also say, thinking about the countries that are negotiating with us, that it also offers them guarantees with regard to us; that is to say, it is not merely a declaration, but a factor that fits perfectly into the negotiation process.
Therefore, my Group still thinks that it is absolutely essential to include a reference to the Charter in Article 6(2) of the Treaty.
As I believe that the President-in-Office of the Council is going to have a very busy weekend with the next meeting, I ask him to pass on a message to that meeting, so that the Ministers of Foreign Affairs can pass it on to the Heads of Government.
It is as follows: if the European Council in Nice does not succeed in integrating the Charter in this way, I am afraid that the European Parliament will have difficulty approving the reform of the Treaties.
I think that this is a positive message that the President-in-Office of the Council must give to his colleagues, because we still have time to include the Charter in Article 6 of the Treaties.
After Nice we will be able to start talking about the European constitution.
For now, the important thing is for this stage to be consolidated.
This is our proposal.
Madam President, allow me, on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party, to begin by congratulating the rapporteurs and all those who have contributed to the Convention.
They have shown that European issues can be worked with in a new and exemplary way, a way superior to that of the Intergovernmental Conference because of its open and democratic method of working, involving full public control and opportunities for citizens to participate.
The fact that European cooperation is not only based upon economic agreements has been mentioned in this Chamber on a number of occasions.
This has become additionally clear in the course of last year.
The growth of xenophobic and anti-democratic movements brings the issue of common European values to a head.
As the European institutions acquire ever more power over citizens, it is also important to place limits upon this influence.
The proposed Charter is unique in the way it gives a central place to the citizen and her rights.
Naturally, political compromises have also been made.
There has been give and take but, on the whole, what we have here is a catalogue of common and modern rights which give clear and concrete form to the European community of values.
Because there is a certain amount of concern about this, it is important to point out that the Charter supplements, rather than competes with, the Council of Europe' s Charter of Human Rights.
It is therefore important that, no later than in Nice, the legal opportunity should be created for the EU to sign the Council of Europe' s Convention.
At the Nice Summit, the Charter will be accepted in the form of a political declaration.
This must not be transformed into a mere ceremony with the vaguest of declarations.
People are tired of this type of event.
It must be made clear that the Charter is to be regarded as morally binding.
As soon as possible after the Summit, the Swedish Presidency must also establish the procedures for working on the Charter' s continued status, the objective being that, following certain changes, it should become binding and part of a future European constitution.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, the Charter of Fundamental Rights, which is a key stage in the construction of Europe, has given rise to much discussion.
Some think it a success and others now think it a thwarted ambition.
Many people thought that Europe at long last had the opportunity to emerge from the single free-trade area and the liberal rut in order to establish the foundation of a People' s Europe.
Everything conspired to strengthen this hope: the formation of the Convention which established a new precedent in relation to the usual intergovernmental method, the public debates and the full set of texts available on an Internet site that was accessible to everyone, as well as the fact that the opinion of civil society was consulted.
Transparency was no substitute, however, for the democratic deficit, as the NGOs were only given five minutes to speak and their points were only rarely taken into consideration.
So, yes, some progress was made, but not enough to compensate for the omissions.
It took many weeks of battling to incorporate the right to strike into the Charter.
The right to employment was transformed into the right to work.
The right to health, social security, accommodation or a minimum income either do not feature, or are expressed only as a token of social cohesion.
Freedom of the press is no longer 'guaranteed' , only 'respected' .
Minority rights are the minimum possible.
Discrimination between European and third country residents is ratified, as is the freedom of movement laid down in the Treaty of Amsterdam, or the right to live as a family, even though this is recognised in international law.
A great many rights, including political rights, become subject to a European preference in place of national preference.
So what has become of our sacrosanct principle that the law shall be universal, indivisible and unique?
What has become of European citizenship, the heart of this Europe of equality for all citizens?
We are left with a feeling of bitterness.
This Charter is the extension of a liberal Europe which is opposed to the social Europe of the citizens.
What attitude can we possibly adopt now with regard to this text which is no better than nothing since it falls short of existing rights?
The Charter as it stands is in no position to become 'meaningful' for the citizens of Europe.
All it brings is an added value; it does not remotely meet their expectations or their requirements.
As regards fundamental rights, is it possible to accept a minimal common denominator at a time when Europe wishes to set itself up as a role model for human rights?
We must refuse to be satisfied with this minimalist Charter to which the Social Democrats of Europe appear to have resigned themselves.
The Charter cannot serve as a smokescreen for the French Presidency in order to conceal an IGC that is on its last legs.
At the European Summit in Nice, in December, civil society resolved to mobilise in order to make itself heard and to forcefully express its desire for a charter offering the citizens of Europe genuine guarantees.
We must support these actions and, rather than accepting a shaky text, we must call upon the Convention to continue working after Nice, involving new procedures and extensive public debate.
It is not just our rights and our freedoms but our democracy which is at stake here.
Madam President, the Charter of Fundamental Rights is a very important project for the future of European integration and it has my support.
Why? First, because it secures the rights of our citizens vis-à-vis the institutions and bodies of the European Union.
Secondly, because it plugs a gap in the protection of fundamental rights for people living in the Union.
Thirdly, because the Charter also ensures that the current level of protection in the European Human Rights Convention also applies in the Union; in fact, at some points, it goes even further than the European Human Rights Convention.
Fourthly, because the Charter - and this is particularly important for me - is based on indivisible civil and political human rights and fundamental social rights.
As a member of the convention, I argued for even further-reaching social rights, especially for the right to work and to a minimum, subsistence-level income to be enshrined in the Charter which, given the current social charter, it should have been.
Nonetheless, I share the overall appraisal of the European Trade Union Confederation that, despite the narrow interpretation of social rights, the Charter of Fundamental Rights is an important step on the road towards a social Europe and a citizens' Europe and is a decided improvement over the present situation.
Madam President, I think that what we need now, especially in the run up to Nice, is a comprehensive public debate with our citizens on the text of the Charter; we must also consider how to give them the opportunity to agree to this Charter.
I personally am in favour of a European referendum on the Charter, as this would enable the very citizens of Europe to give us democratic authorisation to press ahead and build up Europe.
Madam President, great importance is often attached to the signing of charters, and this often assumes legendary status.
Such was the case with the Charter of Fundamental Social Rights of Workers, signed in Strasbourg during a European Council, which appeared to have discharged the institutions' undertaking to resolve the issues related to the protection of workers' dignity.
And then the recantation: in actual fact, in Maastricht, Great Britain did not sign the social chapter, going back on the profuse rhetoric which it had lavishly dispensed when proclaiming the vital importance of signing the Charter of Fundamental Social Rights of Workers.
Well then, let us endeavour to ensure that this situation is not repeated in the case of the Charter of Fundamental Rights.
To this end, besides the signatures, it is important for there to be effective political undertakings implemented within the timeframe - every day - by all the countries and political forces.
The Charter cannot be amended and this gives rise to a democratic deficit, leading us to support the Biarritz conclusions not to consider it to be legally binding.
In fact, if it were possible to amend the Charter, if it were admitted that the Charter does not provide for duties and does not provide fully for rights, things would be easier: the Charter does not go far enough in protecting the natural family or safeguarding children; it disregards the need for rules to regulate every new global information technology; it discriminates between private and public education; with regard to safeguarding the environment, it disregards the protection of health and animal rights; it is too general with regard to consumer protection and leaves the door open to the marketing of extremely harmful foodstuffs.
In addition, there are political gaps in the Charter such as the fact that it does not tackle the issue of political refugees.
Therefore, we feel that the Charter is only important as a position of principle, as a starting point for a debate: a debate which we consider useful for the future but which has yet to develop, which must take place alongside the unification process.
We will assign to this Charter the value of a political declaration, committing ourselves together: we will therefore vote for the recommendation and the Alleanza Nazionale will enter into a democratic debate that will supplement and finalise the content of the Charter over the coming months, and which will evolve alongside the accession process and the new European citizenship.
Madam President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I believe this Charter is nothing more than the umpteenth example of the ability of the European Union and its Member States to proliferate empty texts and declarations of intent.
This Charter, as you know, has no legal basis, nor does it provide for any body capable of enforcing compliance with the rights and principles it proclaims.
This Charter is just another empty text, and the appeals from Mr Barón Crespo and others to include a reference to the Charter in Articles 6 and 7 of the Treaty are not going to change a thing.
We are aware, in the Austrian case, for example, that Europe went outside the scope of the Treaty in responding with bilateral measures, and it was not empowered, there being no authorisation under Articles 6 and 7, to ensure respect for the fine principles to which it claims to adhere.
The issue is more important than that.
The Cologne Council had the bright idea of thinking up a bone to keep the dog busy, the dog in question being the European Parliament, and so it invented this Charter, and Parliament, as it is increasingly accustomed to doing, threw itself upon the proffered bone and gave it a good chew, to such an extent that we are, today, completely under the illusion that we are taking part in some historic event.
Yet the real issues before us are the blank pages of the French Presidency' s executive summary, the issue of the Commission and the issue of the weighting of votes within the Council, and Parliament, which has always adopted a strong line with the weak and a weak attitude towards the strong and which is going increasingly downhill in its way of approaching matters, can find nothing to say about this planned destruction of the Commission.
It is going along with this sideways shift which is turning the executive Commission into a sub-council, an underling of a Council which is and will be stronger yet.
What is actually on the agenda of the Nice Summit is the slide towards intergovernmentalism firmly anchored in the texts.
You can accept the situation, you can let off steam by producing great empty texts, but that is the reality of the situation and it is distressing to note that the small countries of the European Union, in persisting in wanting one Commissioner per Member State, are supporting the plan of undermining the Commission.
We are currently conspiring to kill off the Commission, a murder with a willing victim, since the Commission fell in with the Council' s proposals last week.
So let us either lament or pretend to rejoice, let us celebrate this great event which is actually just a perfectly empty great event.
I think we ought to remind ourselves of that.
Whether we vote for this Charter, against it, or abstain altogether, nothing will change.
Mrs President, you would not believe that Mr Dupuis and I were talking about the same text.
Behind the vote on the Charter, there is an ill-concealed agenda to create the first part of a constitution for what might be called a United States of Europe.
The Charter will not, of course, be written into the Treaty until after a special constitutional conference in 2004 but, as it receives the solemn signature of the Commission, the Council and Parliament, the European Court of Justice will already be acquiring a new source for its judgements, and the Court of Justice' s representative has, of course, already given notice that it will draw inspiration from the Charter.
The Commission' s representative at the Turin Convention attaches judicial significance to the document.
It is therefore absurd for the Danish Government to maintain that there is no trace of anything new in the Charter.
In that case, what purpose is served by the text?
Naturally, the Charter contains innovations in relation to existing law.
For example, there is a ban on discrimination against national minorities, which is good, and there is new wording on positive discrimination in favour of the under-represented sex and new rules on cloning, the protection of personal data and the right of access to documents.
The problem is not the content but the aim, which is to go one better than the national constitutions and the European Declaration of Human Rights.
The European Court of Justice will become our new Supreme Court and constitutional court, including in all issues relating to fundamental and human rights, and it will also become the chief interpreter of the European Declaration of Human Rights.
In the Convention, I tabled amendments to the effect that the Charter should conform to the national constitutional courts and the Court of Human Rights.
The very fact that it was not possible to adopt these amendments witnesses to the aim of creating a constitution.
Unfortunately, I must therefore vote against the Charter.
Madam President, first my heartfelt thanks to my friend and delegation leader Méndez de Vigo, who swapped places with me because I was due to head a conciliation for parliament.
The convention did a grand job.
With this result, Minister, Europe has created an awareness of its intellectual principles, which we can use to measure what holds it together at its very core.
Many new rights for children, the elderly and the disabled are mentioned, together - and I find this most interesting - with a new freedom to conduct a business which is almost tantamount to a sort of ban on socialism.
It is, to all intents and purposes. And anyway you are social democrats, not socialists.
It is also important for me that the preamble refers quite clearly to spiritual/religious principles, because anyone who denies his roots cannot grow and if you cannot grow, you cannot blossom.
And we want a Europe which blossoms, prospers and grows, which is why we wanted and were right to refer to our roots.
So what happens next?
The Charter of Fundamental Rights is to become part of a future European constitutional treaty - a constitutional treaty, mind you, not a constitution -, in order to make it perfectly clear that the European Union is not a state, it is not a nation state; on the contrary, the European Union goes its own separate way.
The nation states still have their special position and it is they and only they which can amend the treaties through the usual ratification process.
This is what we mean when we talk of a constitutional treaty rather than a constitution.
If we are want to be credible, then we cannot apply the concepts of 19th and 20th century constitutional case law to the development of the European Union; we must develop special new concepts.
That is why we are right to say not state but union of states, Commission or Executive rather than government, constitutional treaty rather than constitution.
If we want Europe to succeed, we need to define these concepts clearly; if we want Europe to succeed, we need a streamlined Europe.
We want Europe to succeed and that means that the principles must be right, the concepts - the clearly-defined concepts - must be right, the division of powers must be right and then perhaps, at the next European elections in 2004, we will be in a position to present a constitutional treaty, a complete constitutional treaty which will win the citizens' confidence and convince the experts.
Success starts with clear concepts.
(Applause)
Madam President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I believe that this vote which Parliament is about to declare in order to enable you, Madam President, to proclaim this Charter on behalf of this House, is a significant one.
Now that we have had the single market, it is now time for a Europe of rights The concept of citizenship within the European Union is a relatively new one.
Let us remember that this was originally an initiative from Felipe Gonzales, who proposed this fine idea.
Since then, it has been expanded upon and brought to life.
Until now, it existed only in the form of an anthem, a passport, but now, I feel that with this Charter, it also will have some substance, the definition of rights as they are stated in this fine text.
It is a fine text because it is readable, clear, precise and framed with an eye to the future - well, we shall see, but in the meantime, as of right now, it is possible to read it as if it were a legal text, and that is what we sought to achieve.
For women, too, it is a text that represents some progress since it is couched in gender-neutral terms.
It is also, however, a text whose content we can be proud of, as it is well balanced.
The first right it stipulates is the right to dignity.
How can we fail to recognise that in the twenty-first century, once the concept of dignity has been set forth, the key thing is the indivisibility of the whole package of rights?
So individual rights and citizens' rights are included, but also social rights.
I am well aware of how difficult the Cologne mandate was.
Some say it was a balanced mandate, others that it was inadequate, but it was a mandate whose dynamic force we used to the full, and even almost exceeded.
Some Members of this House, including in my own political family, in the widest sense, will deplore the lack of reference to a minimum income, the right to accommodation or the lack of any explicit reference to the European Social Charter and the Community Charter of Fundamental Social Rights in the general provisions of the text.
I would, however, urge them to read the text carefully.
Going on the speeches that I have heard this morning, I am not sure that everyone has read this text properly and grasped its full scope.
Let me briefly discuss the scope of the text.
I would urge those that are of the opinion that the text does not go far enough as regards social rights to consider the legal status of the texts we currently have available to us on social rights at the European level.
The Charter has actually been drawn up as if it were a text which might become binding.
It goes well beyond the texts with which we identify in political terms but which, from the viewpoint of the legal instrument implementing them, even if they, of course, are based on common policies, do not, however, in legal terms define any real rights which might, eventually, be recognised by a judge.
You have to realise that this is a text which must be brought to life. To adopt an expression used by Catherine Lalumière, I would say that we have to "put it into orbit" .
In order to do so, we all need to work hand in hand, on the basis of, I hope, the largest possible vote by this House.
This means that we must all get involved, Members of the European Parliament, members of the national parliaments, the Council, of course, the national government, but also that same civil society which supported us in the process of drawing up the text.
If I might briefly turn to the legal status of the text, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, you referred to the work of the IGC last night.
My impression was that, even though several governments did not want it, there might still be a clear majority in favour of a reference in Article 6.
That is not the be all and end all for this Charter' s status.
It will ultimately have to have its rightful place as the preamble to a constitution, but that is a matter for our long-term institutional development.
In the short term, we remain committed to its being referred to in Article 6.
This is the mandate we have given our representatives.
As far as Parliament is concerned, the phase we are about to enter is the outcome of a long struggle, one we undertook as early as 1975 and which has been continually highlighted through our resolutions, our Spinelli draft treaties, our draft European constitutions.
When we come to vote, I would hope that we shall be able to have the maximum number of Members in the House in order to give you the maximum support, Madam President, when you proclaim the Charter.
Mrs President, the Charter includes a number of welcome points.
The right to good administration, which Mrs Malmström also talked about, is one of the most important advances of all.
That right does not exist in other international documents, and it is absent from the constitutions of many Member States.
Access to a more open administration is one of the most practical improvements the Charter can offer our EU citizens.
The Charter also opens the way to minority rights because Article 22 says that the European Union must respect cultural, religious and linguistic diversity.
Such respect, combined with a ban on discrimination, creates a basis for securing the position of minorities in the future.
The method of working has been a success.
It has been so successful that, in his speech last Friday, the Finnish Prime Minister singled out the method as a way of coming up with ideas in anticipation of a future EU constitution.
This is something I consider to be important.
It is also important, however, that the EU should subscribe to the Conventions on Human Rights.
The two belong together.
Finally, I am delighted to note that children too are mentioned.
I hope that this provides a basis for Commissioner Vitorino to take measures to ensure that the EU can make a contribution before this autumn's summit on the position of children.
I am also very proud to see that a representative of my parliamentary group in my own country, Gunnar Jansson, played a very important role when this Charter was drawn up.
I believe he has contributed to the clarity to which Mrs Berès referred in this Chamber.
The Charter is clear and concise and could be a model for many other constitutions.
I want to add my congratulations and thanks to Mr Méndez de Vigo and all those who worked on it.
I not only thank them but envy them.
An extraordinarily fine job has been done.
We have a text here which states concisely what Europe is about and states what rights we uphold as citizens of this great Union.
I am sad, indeed, to see the ranks of British Conservatives have lined up against the idea of making the institutions of the Union answerable to breaches of the rights of the citizens of the Union.
It is a sad thing that the party of Churchill and Maxwell Fyfe should have come to this point that, when we at last try to ensure that the institutions of the Union are not the tyrants of Brussels but persons subject under Article 51 to the obligations binding on all institutions of the Union, the British Conservatives say "no".
I am not sure yet, because I have not heard from them, how far Mr Blair's hounds will be let free from the leash to speak out for this brilliant project.
I hope that Mr Martin, who did such a fine job in helping at this convention, will be persuading his colleagues that the time has come not merely to adopt this Charter but to make it part of our law, binding upon those who govern us, not merely a proclamation but a binding part of the Treaties.
Perhaps the best we can do for the time being is get it mentioned in Article 6 but that will only be for starters.
It is not a perfect document; we all know it is not a perfect document.
Nothing in life is perfect and it is also not perfect to declare rights but not uphold them effectively.
I do note that there are articles about the presumption of innocence and about the principles of legality and the right to defence.
As I said last night - I will say it again today - there are too many failings in that respect all across this Union and sometimes, in our eagerness to develop judicial and police cooperation, we neglect the importance of ensuring that the innocent are not made the passive victims, the collateral damage of a war against crime.
Let us not merely adopt these rights but make them real in the hearts and in the experience of our citizens and let us make them part of our law.
Madam President, I do not underestimate the very important ambition of establishing a community of humanitarian values or the fact that civil, political and social rights have been placed on a par for the first time in this type of text.
I also see the method instigated with the Convention as innovatory with regard to ensuring greater information and greater transparency.
Despite all that, however, there is a major source of dissatisfaction.
There is a significant gap between our initial ambitions and what we have actually achieved.
It is, of course, possible to highlight this or that article, to welcome the genuine progress made in affirming a number of new rights relating to developments in our societies or in reaffirming crucial fundamental rights.
It is also possible to pinpoint articles which fall a long way short of the rights acknowledged elsewhere, particular in social issues.
We should not be drawing up lists of advantages and disadvantages, Madam President.
Last time, you spoke of the glass being half full or half empty.
We should instead be looking at the Charter in terms of its overall approach and ambition and asking ourselves whether it actually lives up to the demands and expectations of the citizens of Europe and whether it provides them with adequate support to confront the challenges of the age.
Well, I have read the text. I have read it again and again.
It is, indeed, a text that is easy to read. I have heard the arguments put forward by my fellow Members, but I still think that the Charter contains some ambiguous provisions that are very dangerous and that the common denominator is still the lowest possible one.
Finally, in spite of the innovative approach of the Convention method, which I have mentioned, things must be stated openly.
The citizens of Europe have continued to be insufficiently informed and if they had been consulted, as should have been necessary, in order to contribute towards drawing up the Charter, then its content would almost certainly have been rather different.
It is never too late to set things right.
Nice should not be just the finish line for the Charter, an opportunity to express self-satisfaction. It would be wise to also make it the starting point for the widest possible "citizens' debate" regarding this so important issue of fundamental rights.
Finally, precisely because the decision on the Charter is a major political decision, I am with those Members of the House that think it premature for Parliament to declare its opinion today.
Madam President, the draft European Parliament resolution on the Charter of Fundamental Rights has the same ambiguous foundation as the work of the body itself.
In both cases, we are asked to approve texts without being told what they are to be used for.
Are we talking about a political declaration?
Is it an addendum to the Treaty?
Is it the first part of a future constitution?
We will find out at a later date, after Nice, no doubt.
This uncertainty introduces a fundamental flaw into the consent given at the close of work within that body or in today' s votes.
Some Members are trying to set their minds at rest thinking that a vote in favour does not commit us to anything, given that the Charter is going to remain nothing more than a formal declaration.
A mistake!
Because, at the very least, if this text is in fact adopted as it stands - and that is a crucial condition, to which I shall return - it will become binding, by virtue of the Court of Justice case law.
There are two aspects in this process which I find fascinating.
Firstly, the Charter adopted in this way would take us directly to the sort of standardised Europe which the overwhelming majority of Members of this House claim to abhor and which the voters do not want at all.
Tomorrow, however, the Court of Justice is going to be able to interpret these rights in detail and the Court' s case law is going to be applied in a standardised fashion throughout Europe, depriving each national democracy of its right of autonomous decision.
Ladies and gentlemen, you will not be able to claim that you did not know this.
The second fascinating aspect is that we are today discussing human rights and citizens' rights, a subject over which the European Union has no form of jurisdiction.
Yet the Cologne Council, with the assistance of the Convention, doing a magnificent job of creating confusion, managed ultimately to make every one forget that this area lay within the jurisdiction of the national parliaments, and that jurisdiction is being gradually spirited out of the hands of these parliaments.
On the basis of the current treaties, today' s debate actually has no legitimacy whatsoever, and that is a poor omen for a Europe which claims to wish to ensure that fundamental rights are respected.
I therefore think, and I am addressing my remarks to the Council Presidency in particular at this point, that if the governments meeting in Nice adopt the Charter as a political declaration, they should preface it with some introductory note to the effect that defining and developing citizens' rights lies, in all instances, within the exclusive remit of the national parliaments.
Madam President, this year marks the fiftieth anniversary of the European Convention on Human Rights.
I feel that the present Charter is nothing but a poor imitation in that it raises legal concerns such as the point in Article 2, Paragraph 2, where it states "No one shall be condemned to the death penalty, or executed" .
But how can anybody be executed if they have not first been condemned to death?
The phrase is excessive, superfluous, absurd!
Then it mentions religious rites without establishing any restrictions.
For example, the Italian Constitution lays down the limits of public morality and the European Convention lays down the limit of the rights of others and public safety.
Are satanic or orgiastic rights permitted or not?
This is not clear at all.
Then, on the political side, it fails to recognise the right of the self-determination of peoples, and there is no clear definition protecting the natural family.
Finally, I feel that, while this procedure which prevents not only any parliament but also the European Parliament amending the Charter, and even prevents it amending the draft decision, on the one hand proclaims the citizens' rights, on the other, it denies the rights of the citizens' representatives, of the Members of this Parliament, who are not even allowed to table an amendment.
This is why, since I am in favour of the Europe of the citizens, I do not feel fully represented by this Charter, and I will therefore not vote for the motion.
Madam President, in answer to the question as to whether Parliament should participate in the official promulgation of the Charter I would simply say 'no' .
It really is a waste of time!
Whose interests are we serving by declaring this Charter?
Not the citizens of the Member States, because most of the rights in the Charter are worded so vaguely that any interested party, the institutions included, can interpret it at will.
What is more, no provision whatsoever has been made for an effective system of legal protection, should the Charter become legally binding, God forbid.
In addition, the document is packed with rights that do nothing to curb the powers of the institutions.
As such, the Charter is directed primarily at the Member States, but they have incorporated all the necessary fundamental rights in their own constitutions.
Each Member State is a signatory to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, which provides an additional guarantee for the effective protection of fundamental rights.
So what can a Charter of this kind bring to the situation, apart from serious confusion?
According to Joseph Weiler, the citizens of Europe will soon be suffering from an excess of fundamental rights protection rather than any shortfall in this area.
I could not agree with him more.
Having too much in the way of fundamental rights protection is just as damaging as having too little.
The Charter has turned into a prestige project.
As an institution, the European Parliament has the interests of the citizens at heart, and should therefore have no truck with it.
Madam President, I have championed the Charter of Fundamental Rights from the outset.
And I have always advocated its being legally binding.
However, that does not change the fact that I am unable to join in the predominantly euphoric appraisal of the convention as an instrument of future constitutional development.
Apart from the substantive problems already raised today, merely having national parliamentarians on board is no substitute for an in-depth debate of constitutional questions by the national parliaments.
I would also advise the House not to misconstrue the instrument of the convention as a deus ex machina of the European Union.
Just one last word to the President-in-Office: as a former member of a supreme court, I can assure you that if the jurisdiction of various supreme courts overlaps, this will quickly give rise to diverging case law and diverging case law is only to be expected.
We must not, under any circumstances, lose sight of this problem.
Mr President, today in the vote at 12 noon we will conclude a process that began in 1984 when this Parliament approved the draft Treaty on European Union, which already contained the request for a declaration of rights, a process that we continued in 1989 with the De Gucht Resolution.
The Charter of Fundamental Rights has always been a priority for this Parliament, because it has wanted the principles and values that unite Europeans to be reflected in a text.
This is particularly important at the present time, when we are beginning an ambitious process of enlargement.
The second reason is because the Charter of Fundamental Rights is an essential factor in the move towards political union.
Thirdly, Mr President, and surely this is the most important reason, because a Charter of Fundamental Rights is going to increase the feeling of belonging to the European Union.
For all these reasons, my group, as its chairman, Mr Poettering, has already said, is going to vote in favour of this Charter.
Moreover, this Charter reflects the opinion of Parliament, as we set it out in our Duff/Voggenhuber Resolution on 16 March.
The Charter has been drawn up with the participation of a delegation from Parliament and, as chairman of this delegation, I would like to thank all its members for their work, their commitment and their support over all these months.
It is true, as one of the speakers said, that we have to make an effort to inform people about the Charter, an effort that can begin in this Parliament.
When listening to the speeches from some members, one realises that this information is more necessary than ever.
Some people should read the Charter before they speak to prevent them from saying the things that they say.
Mr President, allow me to say a few words on the effects of the Charter.
I think that there is a false debate.
I think that the reference to Article 6 is logical and I think that the President-in-Office of the Council should take note of what Mr Barón Crespo said.
The chairman of the group to which the majority of governments in the European Union belong said quite clearly that Parliament - or in any event, his group - will not approve the reform of the Treaty of Nice if no reference is made in Article 6.
The Charter is going to have effects, whether or not it is in the Treaty.
In fact; it has already had effects.
If you read the report of the three wise men on the situation in Austria, you will see that the Charter is mentioned on three occasions.
This report was drawn up between 29 August and 6 September, when the Charter had still not been drafted.
Therefore, the Charter, whether or not it is included in the Treaties, whether or not it is in Article 6(2), will bind the Commission - and I would like to highlight the important work done by Commissioner Vitorino in drawing up the Charter - will bind Parliament and will bind the Council, and it will have effects, Mr President, whether some Members of this House like it or not.
Mr President, colleagues who have argued this morning that this Charter does not reflect this or that right strongly enough or indeed at all, or say that it is not Christian Democratic enough or Socialist enough, or Green enough, seem to have missed the whole point of the Charter.
This is a Charter that brings together rights that belong to no party and to every party.
It is a fusion of existing European values in a contemporary and imaginative way.
All sections of the House who are interested in the development of the European Union should welcome that.
As the Commission says in its excellent communication, and as Mr Moscovici has reminded us this morning, this Charter is unique because it brings together civil, political, economic and social rights in a way that is not contained in any other human rights or fundamental rights charter that exists in the world.
It is also, the Commission points out, contemporary because it deals with issues such as bioethics, genetic engineering and data protection as well as access to information.
So it is a good step in the right direction. The convention and its chairman, Mr Méndez de Vigo should be congratulated for it.
The big question that now divides us is what this Charter is for.
For me it has three purposes.
Firstly, to say to the citizens: Europe is not simply something that happens to you, it is a community that gives you rights, that gives you guarantees, that gives you protection in certain circumstances.
Secondly, to say to the institutions: you have a duty, that is expressed in this Charter, to deal with the citizens in a certain way.
When you pass legislation, when you take administrative actions, when you draw up documents, you have to abide by the contents of this Charter.
Thirdly, it says to both existing Member States and to applicant states that when you become a member of the Community you become a member of a community of values.
There are certain conditions that you must maintain and attain to be or to remain a member of the European Union.
That is a very clear message, not just to the applicant states but to the existing states.
If you think of the fragile political situation in one or two of our Member States, that is an important message to be setting out at this time.
How will the Charter be used?
I agree with colleagues who say the Court is not going to ignore a Charter that has been proclaimed solemnly by the three institutions: the Commission, the Council and Parliament.
It is going to bear that Charter in mind when making judgments.
That is to be welcomed, not feared as Mr Bonde seems to think.
Mr Dupuis and even my own European minister have implied that this is a vacuous or empty document.
I cannot accept this.
This is a major step forward in the building of Europe. I welcome it.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, a Charter for Europe and for the citizens of the European Union is a fine thing.
I say this as a federalist, well aware that that the principle we shall have to refer to one day will be the principle of subsidiarity in order to attain greater freedom for the peoples of Europe, including my own people, the people of the Val d'Aosta, which has always encouraged federalism in Italy and in Europe.
It must of course be pointed out, however, that the Charter is only the starting point and not the finishing line.
I would like to stress how important it is to refer to the national minorities and cultural and linguistic differences in the chapter on equality.
In order to provide an international guarantee for the linguistic minorities, we have to make progress in terms of a genuine European constitution.
Mr President, the content of the Charter could have been better.
The issue of its legal status could have been resolved now rather than in the dim and distant future.
What prevented the achievement of both results is, Minister, the same thing that will prevent the achievement of a satisfactory outcome in terms of democracy and effectiveness at Nice: the obligation to reach unanimity on every single part of the text.
Those who are more backward and more reactionary have, once again, triumphed over those who are fighting to see fundamental rights applied to all people and for an effective, legally binding response to new issues such as the risks of science, the rights of the new citizens, the right to a healthy environment etc.
Consequently, we are once again left disappointed and dissatisfied.
We will, of course, vote for the Charter, but we will do so with the feeling that it will not succeed in arousing that enthusiasm and that sense of participation by the citizens of Europe which are so necessary and, as usual, it will be the governments - and some governments more than others - who will have to bear the historical responsibility.
Mr President, it would be hard to deny that, for some years now, the social policies of the States of the Union have been conditioned by economic and monetary policies, by budgetary concerns, by the Stability Pacts and by the flexible and precarious nature of employment, in homage to the great god of the marketplace and to competition, his inseparable companion.
The divide between those who have much and those who have little or nothing is growing ever wider, while, precisely in the name of these sacred principles, those who have much are exacting increasing sacrifices from those who have little or nothing.
The Charter of Fundamental Rights, with its constant referral to national laws and practices for the actual implementation of social rights, is liable to render irreversible this subordination, this unfair system of the wealthy few, this model of a liberal free trade society which is rising like a phoenix from the ashes of European social democratic ideals with striking speed.
This Charter on social rights is a step backwards compared to the laws of many of the Member States and, thanks precisely to the referrals to these laws, it will serve as a tool to alter them or limit their effectiveness.
Civil and political rights are empty, formal rights if they are merely listed in a document and not based on actual social rights.
It appears that the century which is coming to a close, with all its battles to emancipate the under-privileged social classes, has been in vain and has taught us nothing.
We cannot pretend that this Charter is an initial step towards a Union based on increasing solidarity.
Rather, it is the bare minimum in terms of future social policies.
I only hope that it will not be incorporated into the Treaties and that movements calling for a fairer Europe, in which there is a genuine increase in solidarity, will flourish in civil society, in the trade unions and in political organisations.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, today, with the Charter of Fundamental Rights, Parliament is marking a new, important stage in the European Union's journey, towards a more united and - I hope - fairer and more honest Europe.
I refer to the European consumers, upon whom the Charter confers a large number of new, important rights, yet who are being fed meat from the remnants of mad cows, and this is an example of that capitalism which grows fat on the back of the poor; I refer to those factory workers who have the right to a stable job, yet who have no future because, in the name of globalisation, their jobs have been moved to wherever it is least expensive to run the firm;
I refer to students and university teachers and the right to education, and I refer to the crumbling, obsolete structures of many countries which renounce this duty; I refer, ladies and gentlemen, to the freedom of expression and the right to express an opinion, and I refer to the many people who are crammed into the European prisons solely because they think differently to others;
I am concerned by all these and other matters, but I will vote for the Charter, even if it is utopian, for we are all called upon to bring about a revolution and the revolution will not take place if the seed is not planted, the seed of sensible ideals.
Mr President, in the recommendation which is the subject of this debate Parliament approves the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union.
It then goes on to instruct its President and the Presidents of the Council and the Commission to proclaim the Charter of Nice.
But this Charter is clearly aimed at furthering the ever-closer union of the peoples of Europe.
According to the co-rapporteur, Mr Duff, this is a major step towards improving the quality of European integration.
As a representative of my people in England, and not the European peoples, I can only say that I have no mandate to further European integration - and if it truly represents its people neither does the UK government.
In fact the bulk of the people in the United Kingdom are wholly opposed to further integration.
Therefore, as a democrat, so am I. I dissociate myself from this initiative and will vote against.
Mr President, the Charter gives visible form to existing rights, at the same time as historical steps are being taken on behalf of Europe.
Ultimately, the debate is about whether the EU is to be founded upon normal constitutional principles.
The Charter fills a gap in EC law and strengthens the individual' s protection against infringements by European police, by authorities which combat fraud and by authorities which regulate competition.
In spite of the fact that, in practice, we now already impose penalties, there are no normal opportunities for investigating infringements of human rights, and such opportunities are necessary in a society governed by law.
Every individual - woman, man, employee and entrepreneur - must be protected against possible political and administrative injustices perpetrated by the EU.
There are no respectable arguments for opposing this particular requirement.
Anyone who unlawfully suffers prejudice due to the European Union' s legal remedies must be entitled to have the matter legally examined.
If it is going to be possible to develop a competitive, enlarged Europe, the latter must be founded upon constitutional principles.
Broad political support is required for the individual' s right to have injustices legally investigated.
How, otherwise, will a legal area of 500 million people be able to operate?
The Charter constitutes a balanced and solid basis for enlargement.
There are many misunderstandings concerning its material content and consequences.
These misunderstandings must be cleared up.
For those who feel the need to do so, I recommend reading the explanations in Convention 49 and also studying that case law from both courts which is bound up with the Treaty.
The Charter will influence the development of law in the EU and, gradually, it will probably acquire more and more support.
I believe the court should particularly allow itself to be influenced by those paragraphs concerning freedom of trade, entrepreneurship and copyright.
Finally, I want to say a warm thank-you to our skilled delegation leader, Mr Méndez de Vigo.
Mr President, the proposal and adoption of the draft Charter of Fundamental Rights should meet with very broad consensus.
In my opinion, the only people who can justify voting against the adoption of the Charter are those who are against the European Union, as some of those who have spoken today clearly are.
I do not understand how anyone can reject the Charter because it does not cover everything which they would like it to.
The hopes of no one person here have been fully realised because the Charter cannot mirror the views of one section of the population alone, it must be the common point of reference of all those who feel that they are European citizens, in respect for the differences of others and peaceful co-existence.
Could we have done better?
I think so, if only because not everything I proposed was accepted.
In this case, would it be better not to do anything?
Should we reject the Charter?
Certainly not!
I repeat, this Charter turns the Union into a Community of rights; it is a step forwards in the process of constitutionalisation of the Union and it is the first international document to contain, according to the principle of the indivisibility of fundamental rights, civil and political rights, economic and social rights and new rights, all together.
I fail to understand those who say that it is useless and that it is made up of nothing but generalisations and fine words.
To assert this is to disregard the history of the institutions: 'liberty, equality, fraternity' are also fine words, but they formed the basis of many of Europe's legal systems.
It is on the basis of formulae such as these articles that, in time, our law-courts guaranteed our fundamental rights.
Let us leave it to cynical reactionaries to maintain that only strength or money count for anything and that anything else is merely words.
No, the words which embody our principles, our values and our fundamental rights are powerful if we embrace them and apply them to our civil lifestyles.
Therefore, let us adopt the Charter and take the words it contains seriously, let us prevent them being diluted, undervalued or ignored.
We must take our rights seriously if we want governments to respect them and legal systems to guarantee them.
Mr President, I have long been among the sceptics.
Parts of the Charter are to be welcomed, but others are a source of misgivings on the grounds of principle.
What, for me, was the deciding factor was an appeal from Europe' s fastest growing progressive democratic movement, the French Attaque, which characterises the Charter as an instrument de régression sociale or tool of social regression.
Attaque notes that the Charter involves a step backwards in relation to the Member States' , the UN' s, the Council of Europe' s and the ILO' s rules already in force.
Attaque also notes that it ignores trade union rights and that, in actual fact, it is about establishing the free movement of capital.
When Europe' s fastest growing progressive democratic movement, which has its roots in France, home to the first democratic revolution, and which cannot be suspected of anything resembling Scandinavian-style Euroscepticism, is so adamant about rejecting the draft Charter, it is impossible for me to vote in favour of it.
Mr President, I can continue where Mr Gahrton left off.
I think there is a problem in maintaining that social rights must be indivisible and universal and then, at one and the same time in the section headed 'Solidarity' , referring to national legislation and practice.
In this way, it is precisely what is universal and indivisible in these areas that is weakened.
It is that part of the content I have problems with.
However, I also have problems with the structure we are in the process of setting up.
If we really want to reinforce human rights at European level, we ought instead to employ our energy on strengthening the work of the Council of Europe and on having the EU ratify the European Convention on Human Rights and the corresponding conventions on cultural and social rights, instead of slowly developing a system to compete with the Council of Europe, as we are now in the process of doing.
Indeed, the Council of Europe represents the whole of Europe, or all European States.
We have only fifteen of them - as yet.
Finally, there is the problem of wanting to establish a constitution without democratic backing.
That will not get the voting numbers up at the next elections to the European Parliament.
Mr President, the Charter that is now on the table for our approval is a project we can be proud of.
For the first time since the European Union was established we have here the basis of a constitution, a constitution for the supranational structure that is the European Union.
It is a sound document in our view, and we feel it does justice to our standards and values as Christian Democrats.
It articulates to good effect the right to human dignity and integrity of the person.
The same applies to respect for the family and family life, and the way in which the rights of children, the elderly and the disabled are formulated.
In this way, the Charter provides additional protection for the most vulnerable members of Europe' s society, and that is to be welcomed.
The Charter also strikes the right balance.
In addition to the social rights, which are well articulated, the text also cites the right to have the freedom to conduct a business and to choose an occupation.
It therefore strikes the right balance between those rights that are particularly dear to the hearts of the trade unions, and the rights that are more likely to be asserted by employers organisations and small and medium-sized organisations.
My third observation concerns the rights of citizens from third countries.
Here too we have articles that protect citizens against discrimination, for example on the labour market.
That was another of our group' s aspirations.
The pièce de résistance of the Charter is Article 21, the big anti-discrimination article.
This prohibits discrimination in sixteen areas.
I regard it as the jewel in the crown of this Charter.
This article will prove much needed, considering the way things are going and given the amount of discrimination, racism and xenophobia at large in our Member States.
Mr President, it was a great honour to be able to work with my colleagues in the European Parliament and from the national parliaments on drawing up this Charter.
We would like to thank Roman Herzog and Iñigo Méndez de Vigo for steering the convention to such outstanding effect and we sincerely hope that the Charter will be endorsed in Nice with the signature of our President Nicole Fontaine.
Above all, let us hope that our European citizens will frequently turn to this Charter when their rights come under fire.
It is intended to be for their benefit, and we hope they will take this on board with gratitude.
Mr President, on 6 December I am going to attend a demonstration in Nice called by the European trade union movements and the NGOs.
Sixty thousand people are expected from the ETUC organisations alone.
This rally is not a demonstration against the Charter.
There appear to be people from among these circles who are under this impression and who would probably be inclined to, but they have completely missed the point.
It is a demonstration for a social and democratic Europe of the citizens.
The Charter is part and parcel of the shift in this direction, and of the dynamics at work for a strong and social Europe.
As you know, the social and economic fundamental rights are particularly dear to my heart.
The EU Charter must be firmly rooted in the Council of Europe' s Social Charter as well as the ECHR.
Shall I tell you what struck me last week when Prodi and Verheugen presented the progress report on enlargement?
It was the little table at the back concerning the ratification of fundamental rights conventions.
If you compare it with a table of the current Member States, they appear to score lower than the candidate countries, at least when it comes to the Council of Europe' s revised Social Charter.
I must say I find that extremely embarrassing.
The new Charter will have legal force, even if it is not yet binding.
The Court of Justice made this crystal-clear at its last assembly on 2 October.
However, the institutions that are about to commit the solemn act of signing up to the Charter must not just leave it to the lawyers to deal with.
For a start, they must incorporate an amendment to Article 6 of the EU Treaty.
They must set a course for the articles of the Charter to be included, in a binding manner, in the Treaty, and there is a need for supervisory procedures, reporting obligations, independent experts and complaints procedures.
The Council of Europe, along with the Court of Human Rights, has a wealth of experience of such forms of supervision, and we can build on these.
All in all, we must get the message across that Nice will not be the end of the road for the Charter, but only the beginning.
Fundamental Rights, the heart of Europe: the rallying cry of the ETUC and the NGO contingents will remain highly topical in the coming months.
That is what we will take to the streets of Nice for.
Mr President, national constitutions either fail to incorporate social fundamental rights, individual freedom rights and environmental protection or do so to an unsatisfactory extent.
Some proponents of a European constitution or a Charter, by way of an interim step in this direction, see this as an opportunity to make up lost ground in one fell swoop.
There are other proponents of a European constitution who see things differently.
They want a propaganda document, the main aim of which will be to describe the current European Union and justify the future development of a single European superstate, and from which no new rights whatsoever ensue from the point of view of EU citizens.
I support the first aim and reject the second.
The draft Charter of Fundamental Rights within the European Union is a vague compromise between these two conflicting views, with the second taking precedence over the first.
For some rights it will even mean a retrograde step.
That is why this document is not yet ready for decision-making.
In the short term, it is far more important for the European Union to give its commitment to the already existing European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms of the Council of Europe.
In the meantime, the draft Charter can serve as an interesting subject for debate amongst the parties, trade unions, environmental organisations, churches and the many other groupings in the Member States and the candidate states of the Union, regarding future cooperation between European nations.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, power requires control.
The European institutions have power and, for the sake of our citizens, we must set limits on this power.
It is high time that we plugged the gaps in the protection of European fundamental rights.
The debate as to whether the Union should not simply accede to the European Convention on Human Rights just as the Member States do has gone on for years.
I, for one, am delighted that, for a variety of reasons, the Union has not acceded to the Convention on Human Rights
As it stands, the Charter which we shall be voting for today - I hope by a large majority -, will clearly afford us better protection of our fundamental rights which is more in keeping with the times than acceding to the European Convention on Human Rights would have done.
Just under one-third of the Charter contains the same guarantees as the Convention on Human Rights.
The rest, for the most part, ups the ante when it comes to citizens' political rights, economic and social rights and, last but not least, the issues of tomorrow - environmental, health and consumer protection.
The Charter must become European law if it really is to do its job.
The step which we are taking today is just one step on the long road ahead.
The solemn proclamation must pave the way for binding European constitutional law.
Does today's step mark the start of a movement which will end in a European superstate?
No, it does not. The demand for fundamental Union rights, combined with the request that the treaties be constitutionalised, does not mean that a United States of Europe lies at the end of the road.
But we do need a constitutional text for Europe as quickly as possible, a text for our citizens containing clear, comprehensible statements on Europe, telling them what rights they have, where the Union has taken over responsibility, what powers the Member States should exercise, including in the future, and how Europe intends to do its job, with every guarantee that the rule of law will protect their human rights.
We must keep working on this.
We must move in this direction.
Mr President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, Commissioner, first of all I wish to associate myself with the congratulations quite rightly heaped on all those who participated in the Convention, especially Mr Méndez de Vigo and my colleague, Mrs Pervenche Berès.
I should also like to emphasise, with considerable pride, the active and committed participation of Commissioner António Vitorino.
I wish to focus on three points that have already been raised by other Members here this morning.
First of all, there is the commendable way in which this Convention functioned.
This is merit that should be retained and encouraged for future projects, specifically future revisions of the European Union Treaties.
Secondly, I wish to focus on the binding nature of this Charter.
The European public would not understand if Europe were to move faster in making improvements to the market and the currency but more slowly in effectively establishing its rights of citizenship and its basic rights.
Thirdly, I wish to emphasise, as has already been done, that the Nice conclusions and, specifically, the revision of the Treaty, should include this reference to the Charter of Fundamental Rights in Article 6(2).
The pomp and circumstance surrounding the signing and the proclamation of the Charter are not enough; these rights must be effectively put into practice.
That is why, once again, we urge and insist that the Presidency should be able to exercise the role of teacher towards its peers in the Council.
Lastly, I have two proposals: firstly, the signing and ratification of this Charter of Fundamental Rights by their parliaments should be part of existing Community rules for candidate countries.
Secondly, the Nice conclusions should establish a precise timetable for future presidencies to be able to move from this Charter to the Treaty, and I would suggest that the deadline should be set to coincide with ratification by all parliaments of the new revision of the Treaties that will result from Nice.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the Charter which we are preparing to vote upon today with Europeanist conviction is certainly a step forward towards the political integration of Europe, in which we firmly believe.
However, as has been pointed out many times, the text does not have the legal status of a treaty.
This is why we need to take further steps forward.
The final objective is to establish a European Constitution, a fundamental law for a Union, which cannot stop at simply having a single currency but must become a political entity with genuinely common foreign and defence policies, an interlocutor on a par with the United States which will be able to take up the great challenge of globalisation in which the countries of the continent of Asia are also set to become protagonists in the coming years, starting with China.
Therefore, Mr President, the Charter only represents the start of what is going to be a difficult, time-consuming task, but a task which, at the same time, excites enthusiasm.
The text which we are going to adopt today, parts of which, being the result of a compromise - as President Poettering said - fail to satisfy us, must be instrumental in triggering a large-scale debate on the future and on the future European Constitution.
The Charter of Fundamental Rights must confer binding legal status upon the rights and establish the levels of responsibility of the Union, the States and the regions, and it must bear the people's seal of approval.
This is why it has to be debated and endorsed by this and the national parliaments.
In the conviction that the Europe of the future must increasingly safeguard individual rights and the rights of the family and that it must prevent the return of new forms of racism and anti-Semitism, the Members of Forza Italia and the European People's Party will vote for the recommendation accompanying the Charter of Fundamental Rights.
Mr President, first and foremost, I want to say thank you to the participants in the Convention, both from Parliament and from the Commission and the Council.
I think some very skilful work has been done.
The Charter we are to approve today both strengthens and gives visible shape to the common fundamental rights and values our community is to be based upon.
It is a Charter which, to a large degree, accords the human being a central place.
I want to highlight a couple of important points.
Firstly, I think it is good to have made it clear that the Convention on Human Rights and the Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg are to be respected.
It is important that these two bodies should not lose their authority.
At the same time, I think it is important to state that the common values must be established with reference to the different cultures and traditions we have in Europe.
I believe it is important to keep this in mind if we are to obtain the necessary backing for the Charter from Europe' s citizens.
I also want to highlight a particularly positive feature of the Charter, namely its concern with the issue of establishing very far-reaching provisions to rule out discrimination against minorities.
That is something which I think is very much to be welcomed.
I also think it is good to have been far-sighted enough to have included new areas of protection in the picture.
I am thinking both of the environment and of biotechnology.
I believe that adopting the Charter in Nice will be a powerful signal to certain applicant countries of the seriousness with which the EU regards respect for the fundamental freedoms.
Finally, I must say that I am very pleased that the Charter is being adopted in Nice as a political document.
I believe it will be a good basis for the dialogue we must have with the people of Europe about Europe' s future development.
Mr President, Mr President-in-Office, ladies and gentlemen, one thing is clear: if one of the groups here in the House or one of our more than 100 political groupings had written the Charter, it would have be very different on a great many points.
But that is all by the by.
What we needed was a European consensus and that is what we have got.
This is the most modern fundamental rights document in the world today and it really does deserve our special appreciation.
As far as I can see, the convention has extracted everything worth its weight in fundamental rights from over 31 legal sources.
It has clarified the bedrock of values of the European Union and I call on all those who have spoken and who, for example miss the lack of political responsibility in the Charter - heaven forbid - to appreciate the fact that, as stated in the preamble, this text has been formulated in an awareness of the spiritual, religious and moral heritage of the Union.
Allow me to make one further point.
Unfortunately, it proved impossible to secure sufficient coverage in the Charter for the rights of minorities.
The European Parliament delegation wanted to take account of ethnic minorities but failed to persuade the convention as a whole.
In my view this is a failing and it should have been mentioned.
And a word to our critics.
It is standard practice for journalists to criticise politicians.
That is all well and good and that is how it should be, but I should like to turn the tables for once and give our critics, i.e. the journalists, a taste of their own medicine: you have failed right along the line.
We have been working on this text of fundamental rights publicly and transparently for nine months and the whole of the European press has failed to tell our citizens anything about it.
Mr President, I shall not dwell at length on the impact of this Charter at the various levels.
Within Europe, the European citizen knows that Europe is now not just an economic entity; within the candidate countries, no country will be able to aspire to join the European Union without ensuring that its national legal system adheres to the principles of the Charter; and finally, on the world scale, this is the message sent out by Europe.
There are, however, other effects, particularly on our internal legal system.
I shall, of course, add my voice to those of the men and women wishing to include a reference to the Charter in Article 6, and to actually incorporate the Charter itself into the Treaties at a later date.
Indeed, how is it possible for a single moment to think that Parliament' s adopting the Charter will not have any legal implications?
Traditionally, the national parliaments are the guardians of public freedoms, yet here we have a rather unusual method because in parliamentary law, there is no legislation by proclamation.
We shall shortly be officially adopting this Charter as formally as possible and, I would hope, with the largest possible majority, and there will be any number of courts to draw conclusions from it even if it is not incorporated into the Treaties in the immediate future.
There is yet another effect it will have, and this is on our own working methods.
Let me give you an example of this.
My fellow members on the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms, and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs did me the honour of appointing me rapporteur on the issue of respect for human rights within the Europe Union.
I have, of course, to take the 'pre-' and 'post-' Charter situations into account.
Once adopted by this House, the Charter of Fundamental Rights will serve as a benchmark for my report and, as far as I can with my own personal and intellectual resources and those of the people assisting me, I shall carry out an evaluation, right by right and country by country, of the extent to which the Charter is respected in the fifteen countries of the European Union.
We, the Members of the European Parliament, are accountable for the regulations that we adopt with a philosophy which must not be that of zero infringement of human rights.
We need not be naively optimistic, we shall surely find instances of human rights violations, but collectively we have a duty to ensure that it is possible to bring a legal case against such infringements, that there is a suitable court to prosecute such crimes, and a public administrative body to investigate them and prevent them recurring.
This, in any case, will be the your rapporteur' s working philosophy, ladies and gentlemen, once we have adopted, as we are shortly about to do, the Charter of Fundamental Rights.
Mr President, the first problem, as I see it, with the European Charter of Fundamental Rights, no matter how noble its intention, is the internal inconsistency of a document which, while referring only to European Union institutions, strays into areas of jurisdiction where the EU has no current competence - with potentially undesirable consequences.
For instance, in the area of criminal law the abrogation of the right to extradite fugitives to countries which allow the death penalty could mean that Europe becomes a sanctuary for American murderers.
The enshrining of the double jeopardy principle would be embarrassing to the British government who have now decided they will abolish it.
Secondly, anti-discrimination provisions are ludicrously wide-ranging and open to abuse.
These rights open the door for demands for homosexual marriage and adoption, and language discrimination clauses might prohibit the refusal to employ EU doctors in the United Kingdom who do not speak English.
They might even threaten the Thatcherite trade union reforms in the United Kingdom of the eighties.
Most worrying is the Orwellian possibility under Article 52 of the suspension of fundamental rights when the interests of the European Union are at stake.
We have already seen the case of Bernard Connolly whose critical book regarding the Commission was suppressed by the Court of First Instance.
Are we to see a situation come about in which only politically correct statements about the EU will be tolerated in future?
This Charter is not only potentially damaging but unnecessary given the fact that we already have the European Convention on Human Rights which was supported in 1950 by the great Conservative, Winston Churchill, and Articles 6 and 7 of the Treaty of Amsterdam.
We have witnessed the hypocrisy in this House when the left-wing were not prepared to support my motion on the Italian royal family's rights being restored.
We already see the effects of judicial activism in Britain taking powers from our national parliament.
We could now see unelected judges extending this considerably in Europe.
All this will do is to establish a competitive jurisdiction between the European Court of Justice and the Court of Human Rights and play into the hands, or should I say the pockets, of already overpaid litigation lawyers.
Lastly, it will fuel claims that the EU is hell-bent on proclaiming a federal constitution with a charter as its first chapter.
Mr President, with the vote on the Charter we are setting off once again along the road towards a European Constitution.
The Union is a giant of the world's economy but it still lacks a soul. Although the Free Trade Area is growing and the democratic deficit is being reduced, the risk that competitiveness will start to conflict with mutual support and that a free market will encourage nostalgia for the past in social and territorial contexts which feel that their traditions and security are under threat is also on the increase.
The Charter has many supporters but also many enemies, and we have heard the opinions of those who do not want a political Europe.
This difference of opinions is one of the rights to freedoms recognised by the Charter itself.
However, the Charter's enemies highlight the political significance but also the legal status, which does not conflict with the Treaties but reinforces the democratic perspectives.
For some the Charter does not go far enough and for others it goes too far.
The Members of the European People's Party, which has Christian Democrat origins, are convinced that the reference to Europe's spiritual and moral heritage will strengthen the cohesion of a Union which values cultural and political differences.
The method followed by a transparent, open convention and the work carried out by Mr Méndez de Vigo and other Members deserve our full support.
Now we expect Nice to produce a strategy which will make Europe a union of economic, social and political rights.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I could not possibly improve upon Antonio Vitorino' s speech, so I shall briefly speak to stress the quality of the debate in this House, which has no parallel except for the debate held within the Convention, and I should like to congratulate those Members of the European Parliament who participated in it, especially Mr Méndez de Vigo and Mrs Pervenche Berès.
Listening to this debate, I am pleased to see what appears to be a clear majority in Parliament in favour of this text, even if there a number of you still have to be won over.
Some find the text excessively binding, even too advanced in relation to a number of reforms which it would be liable to dismantle, while others find it devoid of content or not sufficiently binding.
I deduce from this that, perhaps, the text is an accurate reflection of this Europe of ours, which progresses by means of compromises between diverse concepts, diverse nations, diverse traditions, and here I think Galileo' s expression might be used, "Eppure si muove" (and still it moves).
I shall refer only to some of the salient points of this debate.
Firstly, Mr Dupuis, quite frankly I do not believe that this is an empty text.
I believe, on the contrary, as Mr Vitorino has said, that it reflects a shared vision of our European Union, giving it, as Mr Barón Crespo said, fundamental legitimacy and, personally, I am convinced that it is a major contribution towards meeting the expectations of our fellow citizens.
They need meaning, they need values, and they need recognition of their rights.
With all its imperfections and limitations, this text meets these needs.
This is also true of the candidate countries, whose citizens are also hungry for rights and values.
The Charter therefore, I am convinced, properly belongs to the political acquis communautaire.
You naturally raised the subject of the legal status of the Charter in the course of the debate.
Let me assure you, as President-in-Office of the Council, that I have clearly receive your message, especially the message expressed very forcefully by Mr Barón Crespo.
Let me repeat, however, that if we had from the outset insisted that the Charter must be binding, then the text would have been disappointing.
It was a clear-cut choice between either a substantial text which was liable not to be binding in the short term or a text which perhaps had some chance of being binding in the short term but which would have lost any content.
I further note that there appears to be no clear majority within the European Council in favour of granting it a binding status.
We are building a major political edifice, and every brick in the wall counts.
I therefore believe that a reasonable approach would be to consolidate the foundation we have in this Charter and then to make ready for the next level.
I have no doubt that it will come about in due course.
The Commissioner has just mentioned the spirit in which the Charter was drawn up, with a view to its being made, one day, a binding text.
Just like him, I am convinced, firstly, that it will have singular effects in the immediate short term and, secondly, that it will shortly become binding.
As to the method adopted, my feeling is that compromise has not served to lessen the power of the text and that it has, on the contrary, made it possible to bring out a certain unity and even unanimity regarding the values and rights we share.
I think the criticism that the citizens of Europe were not sufficiently involved in the process to be unfair in part.
Never in the history of European construction has the principle of transparency been applied with such determination and with such success.
Let me remind you that ETUC, for example, representing 60 million employees in Europe, was consulted, that several hundred NGOs were consulted, that citizens had the opportunity to simply submit their contributions and that some of their proposals were adopted by the Convention.
In conclusion I turn to the main aspect, the content of the Charter, in order to say that, in my view, the Charter' s content is truly significant - i.e. meaningful for the citizens - and ambitious.
The Convention chose to include fundamental rights inspired by various texts of the Council of Europe, the Treaties and Member State constitutions.
The human rights included in the Charter are powerful ones.
I am thinking, for example, of the inviolability of human dignity, the right to life with the prohibition of the death penalty.
These are modern propositions.
The ethical issues and freedom-related issues connected to the new technologies and science are dealt with.
I am thinking, for example, of the right to the integrity of the person, the protection of personal data, and, as Mrs Berès pointed out, it is my conviction that social rights must not be denigrated.
The Charter affirms the social values of European construction. It guarantees that the European Union respects and shall respect the implementation of these values within States.
That will help to increase citizens' confidence in the European Union.
The Charter, furthermore, pays special attention to some of the more vulnerable categories of the population, such as the disabled, children or the aged.
It also most forcefully affirms the equality of men and women in all areas, as well as the principle of non-discrimination.
These rights are, I feel, expressed with unusual strength, and this is something on which the European Union can pride itself.
Finally, the Charter adopts the founding principles of the European Union, highlighting the fundamental freedoms of the Community whilst emphasising the value of European citizenship.
Here too, in specifying a right to good administration, the Charter means to be ambitious.
In the course of this debate, I have heard a number of telling phrases: the Charter has been described as a bone thrown to keep the dog that is the European Parliament quiet, or indeed as a flimsy attempt to conceal the fights relinquished by a French Presidency that is on its last legs, seen especially in of the way in which it conducted the IGC.
I shall not take the trouble to answer these harsh assessments, which I do not necessarily share and which, indeed, I hope to see proved wrong when we adopt the Nice Treaty.
The point I wanted to make in mentioning all this is that Nice is a vital stage.
In particular I think we need to tie in Article 6, and also Article 7, and I am hopeful that we shall arrive at reforms on both these points.
Nice is a vital stage, but it is not a finish line.
It is, instead, a phase in the construction of Europe, and I believe that the Charter will be one of the major components of this phase, and I am delighted to see Parliament' s options on this score taking shape.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place today at 12 noon.
Turkey
The next item is the joint debate on the following two reports:
A5-0297/2000 by Mr Morillon on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy on the 1999 Regular Report from the Commission [COM(1999) 513 - C5-0036/2000 - 2000/2014(COS)] on Turkey's progress towards accession;
A5-0303/2000 by Mr Seppänen on behalf of the Committee on Budgets on the proposal for a Council Decision [COM(2000) 479 - C5-0454/2000 - 2000/0197(CNS)] amending Decision 2000/24/EC so as to establish an EIB special action programme in support of the consolidation and intensification of the EC-Turkey customs union.
. (FR) Mr President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, Commissioner, on 13 December 1999, the Helsinki European Council decided to grant Turkey the status of applicant country for accession to the European Union and to set up an accession partnership and a single financial framework in order to help Turkey' s application progress in accordance with the Copenhagen criteria.
This is the spirit in which the preparatory work for this report was carried out within the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy, and I should like, at this point, to thank all my fellow members for the contribution they made towards finalising this report, which, like the Commission, concludes that Turkey does not currently fulfil the Copenhagen criteria.
We must applaud the remarkable efforts Turkey has made, since the Helsinki decision, in devising a programme to develop its judicial framework in order to meet EU demands in a more satisfactory manner, with particular regard to human rights.
One example is the report drawn up under the responsibility of Mr Demirok, Secretary of the Turkish Supreme Coordination Council for Human Rights, who has proposed a very wide-ranging raft of reforms to the Constitution.
However, we must also note and acknowledge that an awareness of the importance of these reforms has caused considerable upheavals in the various political parties and in Turkish public opinion.
Turkish citizens are realising that Turkey' s accession to the EU will require not only the 'painless' revision of their institutions but also a partial renunciation of sovereignty, to which they remain jealously attached, and a radical change in habits and outlook.
This is why Parliament has proposed the setting up of a Europe-Turkey Forum involving expert representatives of the Turkish community and appointed MEPs who would consider in depth the issues involved.
Turkish accession is too important a matter for the future of the Union and of Turkey itself for a decision to be taken in smoke-filled back rooms or behind closed doors.
Lengthy debates will be needed, both in the European Parliament and in the national parliaments, and that is why it is generally accepted that the road will be long and difficult.
The establishment of the Forum proposed by the European Parliament should allow us to overcome the initial obstacles encountered on this road.
The European Parliament will have to tell its Turkish partners very clearly in the debates in that Forum that they need have no fear of any European desire to interfere in their internal affairs and that, on the contrary, it is proposing a contract, the precise details of which are being thrashed out, in the accession partnership, Commissioner, and, of course, in the Convention on the Charter of Fundamental Rights.
It will be up to the Turks to accept it or refuse it.
As matters stand, it is also up to the European Parliament to tell the Turkish people that there are, today, at least three conditions for accession which Turkey must meet.
Firstly, the need for identity must be respected: this need has been demonstrated particularly clearly in Europe by its citizens who wish to preserve their origins in the face of the ineluctable progress of globalisation.
Aware that its diversity constitutes its wealth, Europe is determined to recognise this need for identity, and that is why it insists on the rights and also the obligations of minorities.
It is in this spirit that it is prepared to help Turkey find a solution to the Kurdish problem in particular.
The second problem, which will clearly have to be solved as soon as possible, concerns Cyprus.
It is hard to understand today how it can remain divided by a wall, while in many other places, notably in Berlin and Sarajevo, and even more recently, between North and South Korea, such walls have crumbled over the past decade.
Finally, since the fight against terrorism may now be deemed to be over, the influence of the Turkish army in the drawing up of political decisions should be gradually reduced.
I spoke of the three preconditions.
In 1987, Parliament acknowledged the Armenian genocide.
There are some people who would like to make the Turkish Government' s acknowledgement of this genocide a further condition for accession.
This would run counter to the spirit and the letter of the process defined in Copenhagen for all candidate countries.
I have suffered too much, alongside all the communities of Bosnia-Herzegovina, from the tragic consequences of the systematic resurrection of former atrocities to believe that a peaceful and stable future can be built except by ceasing to stir up the embers of past resentments.
Mr President, Minister, Commissioner, of the two reports before us today, the one by Mr Morillon is more political in nature, whereas mine is more technical.
The Council is proposing that Turkey be added to that group of countries that can be granted loans from the European Investment Bank, so that these credits may be backed by a European Union guarantee.
The Council is proposing with unanimity that Turkey should join the group of recipients of guarantees, and Parliament' s Committee on Budgets is also unanimous in this.
Unanimity does not mean that we are all satisfied with the state of Turkish democracy or that country' s treatment of human rights; we are not.
As Turkey has submitted its application for membership of the European Union, it will certainly be very aware of the criteria for membership as laid down at Copenhagen.
As the European Union agreed at Helsinki that Turkey should join that group of countries with which membership would be negotiated, the human rights situation in Turkey is not just that country's internal affair.
Through its application for membership, Turkey has given the Union the right to adopt a position on its internal affairs.
There has been a huge temptation to impose conditions on loans to Turkey, with reference to issues of democracy, but there has been no opportunity, technically speaking, to do so in this report.
The issue here is just to supplement the earlier Council Decision 2000/2024/EC.
If we had wanted to impose conditions they would have had to be imposed last year when the earlier decision was adopted.
We did not know then that Turkey would be selected to join the group of recipients of guarantees, as a consequence of positive developments.
Besides, conditions could not have been imposed exclusively by a decision of the European Parliament.
I would like to focus attention on how little Parliament is able to influence the work of the European Investment Bank and how badly the European Union monitors that work in general.
The Guarantee Fund in the EU budget, which guarantees the loans to Turkey, comes under the category of compulsory expenditure, and the Council, as a result, did not need to take account of Parliament's positions.
In the European Parliament we would in general like to impose conditions on European Investment Bank loans as far as environmental considerations and the social protection of the citizens of non-member countries are concerned, and, in the case of Turkey, this also concerns a respect for human rights.
But the present legal basis for the Guarantee Fund does not make that possible.
Better cooperation is needed between the institutions of the EU.
The problems associated with the monitoring and examination of the management of the European Investment Bank also stem from the fact that there are only representatives of the Member States in its governing body, and some of them want to prevent the Commission and the European Parliament from taking a stand on bank matters.
As a result, the European Investment Bank is one of the last havens in the world of banking.
The ripples of social debate do not reach its shores.
Finally, I would like to draw your attention to something the Commission already knows and, for that reason, I would like to draw the attention of the Council in particular to it. I refer to the fact that the 2001 Guarantee Fund is not large enough to meet all the commitments made.
That may also be true for 2002.
If we are to keep to these commitments, we must amend the residual reserve for guarantees.
That is the only matter on which Parliament can give its legal opinion.
The Council is granting more loans and offering guarantees than there are legal preconditions for.
- (FR) Mr President, Commissioner, rapporteurs, ladies and gentlemen, you requested a debate on the European Union' s relations with Turkey, and you are aware of the importance the Council attaches to strengthening this relationship, which has gained new currency since this country' s candidature was recognised in Helsinki.
The debate on the two reports presented by Mr Morillon and Mr Seppänen comes at precisely the right moment, as the Commission has just submitted two very important reports to us, firstly, its latest report on the progress made by Turkey along the road to accession and, secondly, its proposal for an accession partnership agreement with Turkey.
I shall begin, with your permission, with Mr Morillon' s extremely interesting report, which deals with the whole range of Euro-Turkish relations and, more specifically, with the progress report presented by the Commission in 1999, a few weeks prior to the Helsinki European Council.
In recognising Turkey' s candidature, the European Council was following the recommendations made in the Commission' s report, whose analysis I believe we can all endorse.
Since then, both the European Union and Turkey have taken steps to put the Helsinki decisions into practice.
I am, of course, thinking of the work undertaken within the Association Council with a view to bringing Turkish legislation into line with the acquis communautaire.
More especially, however, as indeed Mr Morillon pointed out, I am thinking of the efforts made by Turkey to adapt to European standards and practices, particularly in the area of respect for human rights and consolidation of the rule of law.
There is still, as we are aware, a lot of work to be done, but I feel that Turkey is starting to get used to the idea of reforms.
It is therefore up to us Europeans to support this country on its very long and difficult road to accession.
In this respect, I have no doubt but that the determination of each and every one of us to help Turkey progress along the path of democratisation will in the end prevail.
Who could do this better than the European Parliament?
I can therefore only be delighted at the proposal you have made to establish a Europe-Turkey Forum of human rights, thereby enabling Turkish citizens to size up the European prospects being opened to them, as well as Europe' s requirements.
Having said that, I am of course aware that Turkey' s candidature continues to raise questions.
I have noted reservations on the part of many people, not just within the European Parliament, but also in all the Member States.
I have taken note of your wish, as expressed most clearly by Mr Morillon, to be fully involved in the destiny of Euro-Turkish relations.
I wish to make myself perfectly clear on this point.
I do not think that anyone is trying to dodge the issue in this respect, quite the opposite.
A good many discussions have already taken place, right here in the European Parliament as well as within the national parliaments of Member States.
These discussions have occasionally been difficult but also, I am convinced, profitable.
For its part, the French Presidency has no intention of shirking this legitimate concern for transparency, information and debate.
I feel that Mr Morillon' s excellent report bears witness to your determination to bring Turkey' s pre-accession process to a successful conclusion, while exercising the utmost vigilance, quite legitimately, regarding the still considerable reforms which this country has yet to undertake.
We all agree that negotiations cannot in any case commence, let me stress that fact, until Turkey has met the Copenhagen political criteria in full.
That is why I took careful note of the suggestions made by Mr Morillon regarding the preconditions for Turkey' s accession, which are certainly worth looking into.
We are indeed all aware, yourselves, the Council Presidency and also, I believe, the Commission, whose latest report on the progress achieved in Turkey stressed once again the efforts this country still needs to made, the reforms still to be implemented in areas as crucial as respect for human rights, fundamental freedoms and minority rights, in particular, areas in which, as we can only regret, progress is still too slow and even inadequate.
We must, however, also beware, as your report wisely emphasises, of setting new, extravagant conditions on Turkish candidature.
Let me stress the fact that Turkey must be treated on an equal footing with the other candidates.
It is, in my opinion, a fundamental principle which was laid down Helsinki, and one which must govern the strengthening of Euro-Turkish relations.
For, generally speaking, I think it would be regrettable if we were to give Turkey the impression that we are going back on the commitments we have given and on the principles we ourselves laid down in Helsinki.
That is why, in the same spirit, the European Union must fulfil the commitments it has made with regard to this country, which I think it imperative to meet, particularly in terms of financial aid.
The French Presidency has made this one of its objectives and I believe we are making progress.
This House has, of course, on several occasions been invited to give an opinion on this matter, be it the MEDA Programme or the financial regulations proposed by the Commission to ensure Euro-Turkish rapprochement and to support the customs union, but there are also the European Investment Bank projects, which are essential in order to support Turkey' s economic development and to continue the reconstruction work undertaken following the earthquake.
I am pleased, in this respect, with the conclusions the report presented by Mr Seppänen on the EIB special action programme in support of the consolidation and intensification of the EC-Turkey customs union.
When it last held the presidency, in 1995, France spared no effort in order to conclude this customs union agreement, which has since been in force since 1 January 1996.
It must, however, be acknowledged that the funding allocated to Turkey since then has not always reflected the level of commitments which the Union made at that time.
Progress has been made, however, particularly in the course of the last year, and I am pleased to see the increase announced by the Commission in appropriations allocated to this country.
It is indeed important that the financial resources made available to Turkey should match up to the objectives that have been set.
For its part, the Presidency would like to see this special action programme of EIB loans adopted by the Council very soon, probably as early as the forthcoming meeting of the Council of Ministers of Economic and Financial Affairs on 27 November.
I would add that we are all awaiting with keen interest the proposal announced by the Commission for a single regulation intended to coordinate all sources of Community aid to Turkey, in line with the plans made in Helsinki.
It is only natural to standardise the arrangements for pre-accession aid to that country with those applicable to the other candidates according to the Phare Programme model.
Parliament will, of course, have the opportunity to deliver an opinion on this matter, when the time comes.
As you know, however, this pre-accession aid will be more particularly intended to help Turkey achieve the objectives laid down in the future accession partnership agreement.
This is a key instrument in the pre-accession strategy for this country, and its importance was rightly highlighted in the recent Commission report.
This is a proposal which is going to be examined in detail by the competent Council bodies, so you will understand that I cannot, in my capacity as President-in-Office of the Council, afford to pre-judge the situation.
Without prejudice to the debate due to start this week, I think I may safely say, however, that the Commission has presented a very constructive and very demanding proposal, both for the European Union and for Turkey.
In this respect, I am delighted to see that their proposal is in line with many of the very welcome recommendations made by Mr Morillon.
I am thinking of the intensified work to achieve democratisation, particularly in the area of the separation of powers or of declaring an end to the state of emergency in a number of Turkish provinces.
The Presidency' s preference is for this draft to be adopted very quickly, indeed, if possible, as early as 20 November, the date of the forthcoming General Affairs Council, and, as I have already mentioned, for it to comply with the very specific decisions adopted in Helsinki.
It will then be up to Turkey to take its inspiration from this in order to work out its own national programme to integrate the acquis and in order to implement the reforms, all the reforms necessary, with the support of the European Union.
Major prospects are opening up to us, and we know the task will be long and complex.
Let us be demanding, let us be vigilant, but at the same time, let us remain consistent with the logic of our decision, making a bet on Turkey, having confidence in its determination for rapprochement with the European Union, and let us therefore assist Turkey to boost its ability to implement the necessary reforms which we quite legitimately expect of the country.
Mr President, Mr President-in-Office, ladies and gentlemen, I should like to start by extending my warmest thanks to Mr Morillon and Mr Seppänen for their highly constructive and politically intelligent reports and to say that this debate is taking place at a most auspicious time, a time when we are in a position to set relations between the European Union and Turkey on what may prove to be a decisive course.
As you know, not only has the Commission recently submitted the progress report for the year 2000; it has also proposed an accession partnership for the very first time in the history of our relations.
I am delighted to be able to report that the Turkish Government has since acknowledged this accession partnership as the basis for further cooperation, giving us good cause to hope that we will achieve precisely what we set out to achieve, i.e. that our policy will help the forces of reform in Turkey give new impetus to the reform process and press on with reform in a bid to achieve membership of the European Union.
This draft resolution highlights our common objective of bringing Turkey closer to the European Union.
We must constantly repeat in no uncertain terms that it is in our strategic European interest to anchor Turkey solidly and permanently in our community of values.
We want Turkey to be a modern, open state in which democracy and human rights are respected, the rule of law applies and minorities are protected and respected.
We can already see that the Helsinki process has set a series of interesting and important developments in motion.
In Turkey itself, the first signs of the incipient reform process, a process of fundamental and comprehensive political reform, are beginning to show.
Relations between Greece and Turkey have improved considerably.
Just a few days ago, the Greek and Turkish foreign secretaries confirmed that both countries wished to agree on and implement further confidence-building measures, both bilaterally and under the aegis of NATO.
And finally, negotiations on Cyprus have been resumed under the aegis of the United Nations.
So far, five rounds of talks have taken place.
That in itself is a huge success.
However, the Commission stands by what it has clearly stated in its progress report, i.e. that Turkey, like every other candidate country, must meet the Copenhagen criteria during the process of rapprochement.
For the moment, we are focusing mainly on the political criteria, because accession negotiations are out of the question until all the political criteria have been met.
I repeat: accession negotiations are out of the question until we are sure that the political conditions have been met; which is not the case at present.
Concerns have been voiced on several occasions here in the House.
I agree: we should be worried that there is too little respect for human rights and the rights of minorities, we should be worried about the constitutional role of the army and we are still extremely worried about the situation of the population of Kurdish origin and about the state of emergency in the four remaining provinces in the south-east.
However, as I have said, the Helsinki process is already showing positive developments and positive results.
The most important thing, as far as I am concerned, is that Helsinki triggered a debate in Turkey, a public debate on the conditions of Turkey's accession to the EU, a debate which is supporting and bolstering the forces of reform in Turkey.
For example, the Human Rights Committee in the Turkish national assembly has reported on torture in Turkey and the Turkish government has passed a resolution to bring the Turkish constitution and the Turkish legal system into line with the values of the European Union.
What is important is that everything which being announced and discussed in Turkey is actually being put into practice.
I think that the accession partnership which we have tabled is the best way of supporting this process and of ensuring that the European Union is able to exert the necessary influence on the process itself.
We have listed the short- and medium-term priorities which Turkey needs to implement under a national programme in order to meet the Copenhagen criteria and on which financial support will then be based.
The political section of our report describes the fundamental and comprehensive political reforms.
They include constitutional guarantees of freedom of opinion, assembly and religion, the abolition of the death penalty, and end to torture, reconciling the role of the military with the rules of play of a democratic society, lifting the state of emergency in the south-east of the country and guaranteeing cultural rights for all Turks, irrespective of their national origin.
I have stressed time and again in my contacts with the Turkish Government that the European Union expects Turkey to give a firm undertaking that it will take action to implement these reform objectives.
And I must say that I am convinced that the Turkish Government is firmly resolved to take a decisive approach to the reform projects needed.
President Sezar clearly stated why Turkey had no alternative but to embark on this process of reform in his address to the Turkish Government last month and I fully endorse what the Turkish President said.
Turkey must become a full democracy, not only because the European Union insists on it but because the Turkish people deserve it.
What all this means is that we still have a great deal of work to do.
That also applies to meeting the economic criteria and the capacity to adopt the acquis communautaire.
Here too, I agree in the main with Mr Morillon's report.
As you know, the Commission proposed a directive in July, setting out the legal basis for the accession partnership and creating a uniform financial framework.
This text has been submitted for you to take a stand on it.
I should like to take this opportunity of asking you to support this proposal.
Without a legal basis, the accession partnership will not have what I for one am sure will be a positive political impact, because we will be unable to pass a resolution on it.
We are calling on Turkey, as a candidate for membership of the European Union, to engage in a process of comprehensive reform.
But that means that we too must be prepared to support Turkey's process of reform, just as we are supporting all the other candidate countries with substantial funding.
As a possible contribution to this, the Commission has proposed that the European Investment Bank grant Turkey a line of credit of EUR 450 million, to be used mainly to improve the competitiveness of the Turkish economy on the internal market.
Completion of the necessary political reforms will be one of the focal points - if not the focal point - of relations between the Union and Turkey.
I am delighted that you will be exchanging views on this question with your Turkish counterparts in the joint parliamentary committee next week.
I also welcome the proposals in this report on stepping up parliamentary cooperation and strengthening civil society.
Thank you.
Mr President, I would like to congratulate the rapporteur, Mr Seppänen, on his report, which is so useful in the general context of the debate on Turkey' s accession to the Union.
Here we are talking about establishing a special programme to consolidate the Customs Union, extending the mandate of the European Investment Bank so that it can cover new loans to Turkey in the 2000-2004 period amounting to EUR 450 million.
The report was unanimously adopted by the Committee on Budgets.
Given that this special programme of EUR 450 million, of which the European Union is guaranteeing 65%, specifies that at a provisioning rate of 9 % only EUR 26 million will have to be transferred from the reserve to the Guarantee Fund, there will only be a budgetary impact in the event of a default, because in that case the guarantee would have to be called in.
With these loans from the European Investment Bank we are supporting investment in Turkish industry and in its infrastructures in terms of transport, energy and telecommunications.
All this is in order to increase Turkey' s competitiveness within the Customs Union and thus reduce the negative impact that the dismantling of trade barriers is having on the Turkish economy.
The fundamental issue regarding Turkey is not, therefore, considered in the Committee on Budgets, and this must be very clear.
The fundamental issue of Turkey' s accession continues to be a political issue and it is the responsibility of other parliamentary committees.
Customs Union and the loans from the European Investment Bank have been operating with Turkey for many years.
The aim now is to give the boost that is needed towards future accession.
I repeat that the only serious problems that we could have would occur if the macro-financial aid promised reached the maximum amount established, as in this hypothesis the residual reserve for guarantees would be reduced to practically zero for 2001 and 2002.
Let us remember that it is in the interests of the European Union to fund nuclear safety projects in third countries in the framework of Euratom.
A zero level of residual reserve could lead to definite problems in funding those investments.
The general situation that the report sets out is part of a situation of Parliament/Council negotiation for the 2001 budget, in which the European Parliament wishes to extend its rights to information and consultation in the case of external commitments by the Union that have a financial impact.
This is the position that the Group of the Europe People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats advocates and that Parliament adopted at first reading.
Let us hope that it leads to tripartite dialogue and conciliation.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Mr President-in-Office, Commissioner, may I start, on behalf of my group, by warmly congratulating the two rapporteurs on their reports.
A report on Turkey is no easy task because there are always so many contradictory developments.
There have been positive developments, such as the new minister for Europe, such as the new special secretariat-general for European affairs attached to the prime minister's office, but there have also been regrettable shortcomings as far as Turkey's preparations for accession are concerned.
Nothing has been done about abolishing the death penalty, and very little has been done to set minority and human rights on a solid legal basis, even if a few UN conventions have been signed.
It does not augur well that a person who offers no unconditional guarantee that more will be done about human rights has been elected as chairman of the human rights committee in parliament.
The same goes for the Kurdish question.
There have been a few vaguely positive signs here.
Reports in the Kurdish language may be allowed on television and radio and a certain degree of recognition of the Kurdish culture could follow.
On the other hand, a number of mayors have been arrested and the Hadep party have trouble in Kurdish areas in the south-east.
Surely these contradictions alone illustrate the struggle within Turkey itself between progressive forces and reactionary forces, which simply have no interest in moving towards Europe.
And that is a pity.
The Commissioner is quite right.
We must and we should do everything we can to support and back the positive, progressive forces within Turkey.
I should like here, quite openly, to touch on the so-called Armenian question.
At a meeting which I, unfortunately, was unable to attend, my group decided by a majority to support Amendment No 25.
As far as the content is concerned, there is little to say against this motion. Unfortunately, however, a number of people are using the motions on Armenia and the massacre of the Armenians as a pretext to question, in a roundabout way, the very notion of Turkey's joining the European Union.
I think that is wrong and I think it is dangerous. Nonetheless, I would urge Turkey to take this issue seriously, whatever the outcome of the vote.
We all have to come to terms with our own history and with the actions of our antecedent countries and states openly and honestly.
I think that Turkey should take a fresh approach and that it and Armenia should commission their historians to analyse what happened in order to uncover, explain, take a clear stand on and clearly admit what happened.
I think that would be the best way out of this tricky situation, because it is far easier to undertake this sort of analysis yourself than it is to impose it from outside.
In this sense I should like to revert to what the Commissioner said.
He said that it was in our strategic interest to anchor Turkey solidly and permanently in the European community of values - I think those were his words.
That is what is at stake here and Turkey too should acknowledge it.
Even if Parliament is critical and even if Parliament is perhaps more critical than the Council and the Commission can ever be, we trust that Turkey will choose this way forward and will become a member of the European Union just as soon as it has put its house in order.
Mr President, the European Liberal Group strongly welcomes the Morillon report which we find skilful, frank and forceful.
We will resist the efforts, some of them fairly spurious, to upset the balance the report successfully achieves, especially those amendments which seek to set up the European Parliament as a tribunal upon the past.
Turkey is clearly the place for a debate on the past as part of its general self-examination concerning fundamental rights.
Such a self-appraisal will amount to a veritable cultural revolution.
We should be satisfied that process is proven to have started.
The Morillon report and the accession to partnership commit the European Union to Turkey's candidature.
It is now up to Turkey to show that it is committed to membership.
The European Parliament will play its part in fostering relations with political parties, the NGOs and the press, as well as developing its tricky and sometimes fraught relationship with the Grand National Assembly.
European Liberals are certainly prepared to play their part in bringing closer the prospect of Turkish membership and the spreading of prosperity, stability and security to all European peoples.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Mr Morillon I must congratulate you on your report.
Unfortunately, however, you have not, and therefore we have not, managed to solve all the problems.
In the first place, it is clear that the strategy of accepting Turkey' s candidature was the right one. It was the correct strategy, as the Commissioner commented, because the debate which has taken place in Turkey today in order for it to become a member of the European Union is tantamount to a debate in favour of radical reform of the political situation in the country.
We are at an important historic phase for Turkey, which has made the transition from the phase of debate to the phase of practical action, i.e. the implementation of reforms of the Constitution and the law, such as, for instance, an amnesty for prisoners of conscience.
This is the phase which Turkey is now facing.
We must be perfectly clear, we cannot move on to any further stages without Turkey making the transition from debate to practical action.
That is exactly what the Morillon report states.
Then, there is the Cyprus situation. On this subject we have to tell Turkey that its refusal to accept the rulings of the European Court of Justice in Strasbourg cannot be tolerated.
There have been a number of rulings against Turkey.
Turkey must without further ado fall in line with the rulings of the European Court of Justice as a token of acceptance of international relations as defined by us, and not just by them.
We now come to the basic problem.
A variety of strategies are considered within the European Parliament and within the Member States.
Some are in favour of the candidature and the accession of Turkey, and want this candidature to involve a radical reform of Turkish society.
Then there are those that are opposed to the country' s accession, who take advantage of the essential debate on Turkish policy and reforms to create a great division between Turkey and Europe.
Turkish society obviously perceives this contradictory attitude.
That is why the final problem to be resolved, the Armenian genocide, is of such importance.
There is no one here, least of all myself, who would deny the fact that genocide was perpetrated against the Armenians during the last period of the Ottoman Empire.
It is a clear fact, just as it is clear that Turkey, like any civilised society, should get used to the idea of facing up to its past, however terrible it may have been.
This is one of the indispensable conditions in terms of ideology and civilisation needed for any country to join Europe.
There is another matter, and if we have to vote on it today, the majority of my Group will vote in favour of this resolution.
I am not certain, personally, that this is a useful move, because I wish to take the debate to Turkey.
In other words, I propose that the European Parliament should itself hold a debate on the Armenian genocide, the majority will follow on and we shall continue the debate in Turkey.
Mr President, I should like to start by extending my express thanks to Mr Morillon and Mr Seppänen for their reports.
Mr Morillon, in my view, your report is an exceptionally realistic and responsible report.
We have indeed seen a number of interesting symbolic acts on the part of the Turkish Government since the Helsinki Council resolution several months ago.
However, nothing has been done to change the horrendous situation in Turkish jails, discrimination against the Kurds or Turkey's policy on Cyprus.
The constitutional role of the Turkish military, which is irreconcilable with the rule of law and democratic mores, has become, without doubt, one of the keys to future relations between the EU and Turkey and will only be resolved if the military relinquishes its power.
There may well be differences of opinion on the Morillon report within my group, but one thing is clear - and I imagine this is true of the other groups - and that is that we have no intention whatsoever of mitigating our criticism on these issues.
Compromise is possible almost everywhere, except here.
The most important and tangible result so far is that a debate has begun and a certain degree of political differentiation has started to emerge in Turkey.
We must acknowledge and actively support this.
Nonetheless, what we are looking for here is not just compliance with the Copenhagen criteria but compulsory democratic standards.
Turkey's membership on this basis, rather than for the geo-strategic reasons put forward by the USA or NATO, would enrich the European Union and represent a significant step towards a united Europe.
I have not overlooked the problems which this might cause, such as the fact that, geographically, the EU would then stretch well beyond Europe into what are highly unstable regions from the point of view of security policy.
The fact that the strategic aspects of the prospects of European integration have been addressed neither by the governments nor, Commissioner, by the Commission, and have not been discussed with Parliament in connection either with Turkey's candidate status or with current enlargement to the east is, in my view, unacceptable given the implications.
In my experience - the experience, I may add, of a life which knows just as much about radical social change as the refusal to recognise the need for it in time -, there is no substitute for critical candour.
Anything else would simply play into the hands of those in the EU and in Turkey who oppose this membership.
And that is where, Commissioner Verheugen, I start to lose the plot in your progress report.
When you visited Turkey in March, you at least referred to the Kurdish problem by name, as you did here today.
Your report makes no mention of this problem per se.
I think that is a tragic step backwards in comparison with the old Commission's 1999 report.
Truth is where the concept corresponds with its reality.
At least that is what Mr Hegel believed.
I have yet to see any real progress in Turkey, but I do believe it is possible.
But, in my book, the Commission report is a real step backwards.
Colleagues, please sit down and stop talking!
We are still in the debate.
(Interjection from Mr Ferber: Tell them in German) President.
There is no point, Mr Ferber, because some people have taken their headphones off and, like you, speak Bavarian rather than German!
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the explanatory statement of General Morillon' s report states that the decision on Turkey' s accession is too important for the future of the Union and of Turkey itself to be concluded in smoke-filled back rooms or behind closed doors.
I fully agree with this statement, but I would say that the decision by the Helsinki European Council to grant Turkey applicant country status was not preceded by the essential debate - both public and parliamentary - that General Morillon' s explanatory statement also calls for.
Turkey' s candidature has always divided European opinion and I find it surprising that there is still an ongoing debate on the reasons for changing the traditional position of reserve with which this candidature has always been viewed.
There is, of course, the geographical problem.
Have we forgotten that only a small part of Turkish territory falls within the European continent?
What new doctrine on the European area allows us to frame this new concept of external borders that would result from including Turkey in the European Union?
Europe' s borders are now peaceful but, if Turkey does one day join the European Union, Europe will have a new border; not just an extra-European border, but a border of war and conflict.
One only needs to think of Iran, Iraq, Syria, Armenia and Georgia.
Furthermore, how can we resolve the conflict with the common democratic model that Europeans accept and wish to see, which results from the countless restrictions we see in Turkey on people exercising their fundamental rights, of which the maintenance of the death penalty is merely the worst example?
And what of the Kurdish question, which arises from the fact that the Turkish State does not respect the basic rights of cultural identity of the millions of Kurds that live there?
Lastly I do not feel that questions have been asked concerning the size of the actual population represented by Turkey' s candidacy and the difficulties that this will cause, not only in terms of the Union' s geography but especially in terms of the already delicate balance between large, medium-sized and small Member States.
I shall conclude as I began: the idea and purpose of my speech have been to draw attention to the fact that changes on this scale should not take place without a democratic, ongoing debate, otherwise the deficit in citizenship and participation that many Europeans feel with regard to the model of European construction will continue to grow.
Mr President, the Morillon report in itself provides a perfect illustration of the basic contradictions in the European attitude to Turkey.
This motion for a resolution contains anything and everything, with, in the first place, a great many illusions and a great many ritualistic recitals, which are, fortunately, immediately overtaken by reality, and this Turkish reality obviously does not match European illusions or dreams.
The suggestion that the Europeans are going to bring about, I quote, "a radical change in habits and outlook" in the Turks is both extremely naive and extremely self-important.
What arrogance on the part of the European Union to seek to foist its own values, institutional principles and political culture on the Turkish nation!
The twentieth century has, however, proved the extent to which forms of constructivism and state control, cut off from reality, and ideologies of all sort could lead to disaster.
Let us therefore leave the Turkish nation their right to self-determination, their right to decide their own future, their right to be different, and their right to retain values of civilisation that are patently not our own.
So the only real preamble which we should all be bound by is a recital taking into consideration the obvious facts of the situation.
Turkey is not a European country, its culture is not European, and its values are not European.
Turkey must not, therefore, join the European Union. That is no obstacle, moreover, to Europe' s developing economic, diplomatic, political and peaceful relations with a free and independent Turkey.
Such a clear stance would, among other things, at least have the merit of no longer blowing hot and cold with regard to Turkish Governments, no longer telling them, "yes but later" , "yes but on certain conditions" , "yes but this or that" .
Europe' s contradictions and prevarications only lead to incomprehension and humiliation.
We cannot play about with the dignity of nations.
We shall therefore vote against this report, just as we have voted against all the reports seeking to make Turkey a member of the European Union.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, this report troubles me.
The problems are so serious as to preclude Turkey's accession in the foreseeable future.
I should like to table three reservations: Turkey has not even started to resolve the problem of the minorities living there.
Secondly, there is no end in sight to the dispute with Greece over the island of Cyprus, which still smoulders on.
And thirdly, Turkey's criminal justice system, based as it still is on the death penalty and police torture, is unworthy of a western democracy.
Horrific pictures of serious maltreatment of detainees by the police were recently broadcast on German television.
In other words, Turkey still has a long and difficult way to go and it obviously needs our help along the way.
We aim to help Turkey become a free democratic country in which the rule of law prevails.
The Council should consider whether granting Turkey candidate status has done more harm than good here.
It will have done more harm if Turkey's expectations of accession have been raised and cannot be met because of the political situation.
The Islamic forces will certainly know how to make political capital out of any such disappointment.
VOTE
Madam President, I feel it my duty to stress that we are being called upon to regulate, through the Paciotti report and other directives and regulations which will be tabled before us, a great power: the power of information technology.
Data collection is not a painless operation and different types of database exist: confidential databases, CID databases, services databases - in short, there is an enormous amount of power.
I would stress that in entrusting this huge power of monitoring the European databases to a monocratic body - notwithstanding the total respect and confidence which we have in the Guarantor - we would appear to have momentarily shifted our focus from the central concern of the human person which, in respect of the power of information technology, must be provided with a reference framework of guaranteed rights and freedoms.
In my opinion, the proposal to establish a collegiate body would have responded better to this need.
However, when we come to discuss the power of information in the future, we must realise that more widespread control, and the consequent provision of a greater guarantee for the human person, is a necessity.
. (FR) The Paciotti report is a first step towards attempting to make up the backlog which has accumulated as regards defending privacy and personal data.
To this extent, the creation of an "independent supervisory body" is a positive move.
However, none of the key questions of safeguarding personal rights and freedoms has been dealt with in a truly explicit fashion and the text, which is often technically confusing, lends itself to divergent interpretations.
What is more, it does not go so far as the French legislation on computer technology and freedoms.
Other proposals should have been included.
It should be made mandatory to officially declare the existence of all databases; there must be a ban on merging databases (particularly in the fields of private life, health, social situations, etc.) in order to prevent gigantic databases being created; and, also, employees working with personal data must be given the means to withstand pressure from their employers by the establishment of a code of ethics and a conscience clause of the type that journalists have.
Finally, citizens must be given the means to protect their own privacy themselves by allowing a free choice of encryption in data transmission.
In this context, encryption techniques must be guaranteed by independent bodies.
These few key provisions must be taken into consideration if we are to truly protect personal data.
We therefore abstained.
. I welcome this report and will vote for it.
European citizens are worried about the protection of their privacy, and those worries are not unjustified.
Every day, enormous amounts of personal data are captured, sorted and processed.
Such is the case in connection with credit card payments, tracing the movement of mobile telephones, storing telephone connections, surfing on the internet, processing other data taken, for instance, from forms previously filled in etc.
On the EU level, the threat of possible abuse of personal data is being countered by two directives, namely Directive 95/46/EC on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data and Directive 97/66/EC concerning the processing of personal data and the protection of privacy in the telecommunications sector.
Neither of them applies to the EU institutions.
And yet there is a need for a set of data protection rules, for the institutions not only process internal data (such as data relating to their autonomous activities, budget and staff reports) but also data collected from citizens in the performance of EU duties (e.g. granting subsidies, investigating competition cases, public tenders, statistical research and studies, data relating to the preparation and implementation of legislation).
This report should go some way to filling this vacuum.
Duff/Voggenhuber recommendation (A5-0325/2000)
Madam President, how could the Pensioners' Party not vote for the Charter of Fundamental Rights?
It is the first document of such importance in the whole world to contain an article - Article 25 - entitled 'The rights of the elderly', which reads: "the Union recognises and respects the rights of the elderly to lead a life of dignity and independence and to participate in social and cultural life" .
At last, an important association of States, the most important association in existence, the European Union, and the most important body, the only body directly elected by the people - the European Parliament - recognises that the elderly as such have rights.
This is why I was extremely happy to vote for this Charter.
Arlette Laguiller, Armonia Bordes and Chantal Cauquil voted against the Charter, being aware that charters afford no real protection for workers in this class-ridden society where the only thing that counts is the balance of power.
This Charter refuses to include such basic rights as the right to a decent retirement pension, the right to a minimum wage, to decent housing, to health care.
What is more, exemptions are possible to the article prohibiting children' s work before they have finished their compulsory schooling. This is a serious state of affairs when it is known that, in a number of European countries, an intolerable number of children are working, being exploited and being denied the right to a proper education.
The text does not offer any additional protection and gives governments and the wealthy classes further arms to attack in these areas.
The right to strike, for example, is acknowledged only with the proviso that it is limited "in accordance with national laws and practices" .
The Charter therefore has no binding force upon countries whose legislation does not go quite so far as the minimum contained in the Charter.
In countries whose legislation is more favourable to workers, however, the Charter may be cited to oppose the national legislation in courts of law.
Instead of pulling human rights and social rights up to a higher level, the Charter will enable actions that will effectively reduce them to the lowest common denominator.
Madam President, I did not take part in the vote on the Charter of Fundamental Rights because I do not agree with the procedure: Parliament has been unable to propose any amendments either to the text of the Charter or even to the text of the recommendation.
We had no choice but to take them or leave them.
I do not consider this procedure to be correct and so I judged it appropriate not to take part in the vote.
The Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union is a far cry from the Declaration of Human Rights of the UN, the European Convention on Human Rights and the constitutions of many Member States of the European Union.
The claim that this is the first time reference has been made to social rights does not stand up: there are references to social rights in international conventions such as the international labour conventions.
For example, we note that:
Article 15 states that "everyone has the right to engage in work" but does not recognise the right to a paid job,
Article 16 recognises the freedom to conduct a business, the first international text to do so,
Article 28 allows employers to take anti-strike action (lock out) and sideline workers organisations in negotiations with employers,
Article 3 leaves abundant scope for every form of genetic experimentation,
Article 14 recognises the right to education but interprets it simply as being a right to free attendance applicable only to compulsory education.
The Charter has diminished, not extended people's rights, for obvious reasons.
Those who dreamed up this Charter are banking on using this weighty document to pursue their aggressive policy against everything the working classes have fought, sacrificed and died for over the past 150 years.
If the Charter is adopted at the forthcoming summit in Nice, either by incorporating it into the Treaties or simply by proclamation, it will be a step backwards.
There is no doubt that its ultimate purpose is as a precursor to an impending European Constitution which, in turn, will be the jewel in the crown of the EU's attempt to become a federation in which the institutional arrangements are such that decisions are taken by the minority of strong members but apply to everyone, the main purpose being to serve the interests of private monopolies in the European Union, at the expense of the workers and the people in general.
We are well aware of the fact that the Charter may represent a step forward on certain issues for some countries.
However, for most countries and in comparison with international provisions already in force, it represents a step backwards.
Our aim must be to progress, not to go from bad to worse.
The MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece voted against this text, which is both useless and dangerous.
(FR) The adoption of the Charter of Fundamental Rights would be justified if we already had a European State based on a constitution adopted by universal suffrage, but that is not the case today.
The rights contained in the Charter are already included in national constitutions and safeguarded by national parliaments close to the nations of Europe and their cultures.
Moreover, the Charter is a compromise based on the lowest common denominator, which will be detrimental to social advantages acquired by law in a good number of European Member States.
The right to housing, for example, has been reduced to the right to "housing assistance" , while the right to work has been replaced by the "right of access to placement services" .
No restriction has been placed upon freedom of expression, implying that it would not henceforth be possible to bring prosecutions against criminal statements, such as incitement to racial hatred and violence.
Finally, the Charter does not provide any articles devoted to the duties which are, nonetheless, the counterpart of rights.
We do not, therefore, see any reason to adopt a text of this sort today, unless it is to conceal the automatic failure of the Intergovernmental Conference and the European Council in Nice.
. SOS Democracy rejects the Charter of Fundamental Rights on three grounds.
First, that it is unnecessary.
Second, that it is undemocratic.
And third, that it is likely to restrict, rather than enhancing, the freedom of Europe's peoples.
We shall offer a brief explanation of these three objections in order.
Ratifying the Charter of Fundamental Rights and Freedoms would be one of the most ambitious steps ever taken by the European Union.
Before doing something of such magnitude, we should ask the question: where in Western Europe is the monstrous violation of human rights that this document would address?
We are dealing, after all, with 15 modern democracies, not with 15 Rwandas.
Every Member State is already bound by the European Convention on Human Rights, the UN's Universal Declaration and a host of lesser accords.
Why does the EU, as such, need to muscle in on this territory?
No one has yet answered that question.
Indeed, Roman Herzog, president of the drafting convention, has gone out of his way to claim that the Charter will not create any new rights.
If so, it seems strange to enact so great a constitutional revolution for such small purported gain.
Human rights may not be under immediate threat in the EU, but accountable democracy is.
The Charter will involve the European Court of Justice in a number of political decisions, in fields as diverse as employment law, extradition policy, immigration and the family.
To the extent that no one has elected the judges, this represents a diminution of democratic government.
More than this, the Charter will oblige the ECJ to strike down national legislative acts, or even provisions of state constitutions, in several new areas of policy.
Since the ECJ, on the basis of the far more restricted text of the existing European treaties, has already displayed a worrying tendency towards judicial activism, this problem is likely to be especially acute.
Even those who accept the case for a written EU constitution should hesitate as they contemplate some of the Charter's provisions.
Of greatest concern is Article 52, which provides for the rights referred to elsewhere in the document to be set aside where they conflict with the "general interest recognised by the Union".
This reintroduces the concept of "raison d'Etat" which the Council of Europe has spent the last half-century seeking to eradicate.
The right of a government arbitrarily to set aside its own constitution is the defining characteristic of a tyranny.
In Nazi Germany, for example, this provision existed under the so-called "Enabling Act".
Less dramatically, but no less important, the Charter is badly drafted.
Take, for example, Article 21, which prohibits "any discrimination based on any ground such as sex, race, colour, ethnic or social origin, genetic features, language, religion or belief, political or any other opinion, membership of a national minority, property, birth, disability, age or sexual orientation".
Taken literally, this article would mean that a socialist party would not be allowed to discriminate against conservatives who wanted to run as its candidates, or that an opera company would have to offer soprano roles to men.
How such vaguely drafted provisions will be used in the hands of an activist court is anyone's guess.
Human rights are already respected in the EU, and safeguarded by national constitutional provisions according to the different customs of the Member States.
The Charter now provides a mechanism to circumscribe or override these rights, without even pretending to offer any new ones.
It is a proud boast of many Europeans that we are free to do anything which is not expressly prohibited in law.
Yet now it is proposed that we be "given" our rights by European judges.
SOS Democracy rejects the notion that we should depend on the EU to bestow our own freedoms upon us.
In the words of Aldous Huxley: "Liberties are not given: they are taken".
- (SV) Chapter VII (General Provisions), Article 51(2) of the draft Charter of Fundamental Rights states, 'This Charter does not establish any new power or task for the Community or the Union, or modify powers and tasks defined by the Treaties' .
It therefore also lacks any real significance in terms of people' s rights.
The debate on this Charter has been eagerly applauded by EU federalists who wish to see it as the beginning of a constitution for the European Union.
We nonetheless see a great danger in this Charter.
It is in danger of undermining the Council of Europe' s work on human rights and of leading to a situation in which human rights are dealt with in different ways in European countries in the future.
We are voting against this Charter because we do not want it at all.
That does not mean that we are opposed to human rights as such.
We believe, however, that these rights can be guaranteed by bodies other than the European Union.
We believe that the draft Charter is a bad product which ought not to be taken any further.
Instead, we urge the EU to ratify the European Convention on Human Rights, together with other conventions concerning social and cultural rights.
. (FR) The Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union adopted today by the European Parliament is a highly significant document.
Admittedly, there are still a number of shortcomings in both form and content.
Admittedly, I personally would have preferred a Charter with a much more sizeable social component!
Admittedly, I would have liked to see it incorporated directly into the European Treaties!
Yet, we must not deny ourselves a good thing, nor must we deny the considerable work accomplished or the significant results arrived at today.
The Charter of Fundamental Rights is a document and a Charter shared by all the citizens of Europe!
What we have to do now is publish it widely, introduce it to everyone and get as many citizens as possible to consider its proposals.
This is the way in which it will gradually pervade, through case law, all our national and European legal systems!
It is an extremely positive outcome both for the French Presidency of the European Union and for the European Parliament.
Tomorrow we shall no doubt have to develop and complete it.
Very quickly we shall have to incorporate it into the Treaties.
Close upon the heels of the Charter, we must initiate work on a European Constitution for a democratic, transparent, efficient Citizens' Europe.
Let me reiterate today, however, that we all have every reason to be proud of the conditions in which we have entered this phase, which is so crucial for Europe.
. I voted in favour of the Charter and agree that we should not be opposed to the rights enumerated within it.
However, as I have stated before in this House, I am opposed to the Charter being binding.
I and my government see it as a political declaration.
We must ensure that the existing rights flowing from the European Convention on Human Rights, and supported by the decision of the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg, are not diminished or brought into confusion.
All Member States are signatories and have ratified the ECHR which has built up a considerable body of law and rights and has proven its ability to evolve with society.
Therefore I support the Charter as voted today but I would not support it as a binding text.
- (SV) Chapter VII (General Provisions), Article 51(2) of the draft Charter of Fundamental Rights states, 'This Charter does not establish any new power or task for the Community or the Union, or modify powers and tasks defined by the Treaties' .
It therefore also lacks any real significance in terms of people' s rights.
The debate on this Charter has been eagerly applauded by EU federalists who wish to see it as the beginning of a constitution for the European Union.
I nonetheless see a great danger in this Charter.
It is in danger of undermining the Council of Europe' s work on human rights and of leading to a situation in which human rights are dealt with in different ways in European countries in the future.
I am voting against this Charter because I do not want it at all.
That does not mean that I am opposed to human rights as such.
I believe, however, that these rights can be guaranteed by bodies other than the European Union.
I believe that the draft Charter is a bad product which ought not to be taken any further.
. (FR) I consider that the Charter of Fundamental Rights represents a valuable step forward.
I nonetheless abstained from the final vote, because I feel that some social rights are expressed less clearly than the economic rights.
Both the 'right to work' and the 'right to strike' are handled only indirectly.
Europeans do have the 'right to work' (it would have been surprising if they did not); they have the right to take "collective action" to defend their social interests, "including strike action" .
Why not acknowledge the 'right to strike' directly?
Furthermore, I would have preferred a Charter that did not merely stipulate the 'rights' of citizens but also their 'duties' towards society.
Article 17 very reticently states that "the use of property may be regulated" in the general interest.
There is, however, no mention of social obligations relating to the right to property.
The Charter lists the fundamental freedoms to which my fellow citizens are entitled, but there is no mention of a requirement upon anyone to respect the rights of others.
A society which recognises only rights and not duties becomes selfish.
. (DE) Without underestimating the importance of fundamental rights to the citizens of the Union, the non-attached members in the European Parliament abstained during the vote for two reasons.
First, because problems with the text of the Charter (such as the ban on the reproductive but not the therapeutic cloning of human beings) precluded a vote in favour and, secondly, because the convention as an instrument of future constitutional development would appear to be more than dubious.
However, what worries us most is that the twin-track jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice and the European Court of Human Rights will give rise to inconsistent case law, resulting in the unequal treatment of citizens in these sensitive areas, in breach of their fundamental rights.
We are also convinced that merely having national parliamentarians on board is no substitute for an in-depth debate of constitutional questions by the national parliaments.
. One of the great criticisms of the EU in Britain is that it appears to go beyond what was intended when competences were granted to it, both in depth of detail and in scope of application.
We, in the Conservative Party, are looking into ways of ring-fencing competence which will run with the letter and spirit of the Treaties and recognise the position of the Member States at the heart of the European political process.
Enumerating and entrenching the inalienable characteristics of the system which guarantee rights to individuals and define the limits of the political process, across a number of Member States which comprise a single quasi-domestic legal area, offers a fruitful avenue to explore, to try to achieve these desirable ends.
The problem with the Charter of Fundamental Rights is that it is hybrid, neither a legally entrenched system of rights nor a political code of conduct which draws together legal, economic and social rights in a manner, and this leads to confusion and lack of clarity.
. (FR) The main reason for my voting against adopting the Charter of Fundamental Rights is that I do not wish to be associated with a purely symbolic media stunt designed to send European public opinion a message of identity and hope that is largely built on pretence.
The consensus method adopted by the Convention members has produced, as is generally the case when unanimity is enforced, a minimal Charter characterised by significant omissions and ambiguities.
The original idea behind the Convention was to have a text adopted by consensus which could subsequently be made binding by the fifteen Member State governments when it was incorporated into the Treaties.
In the end it was a fool' s bargain that was struck: the text is actually neither strong nor binding.
The citizens of Europe have scant need of a formal declaration on the fundamental rights they are entitled to because these are recognised elsewhere in international conventions and in national law.
I do not think that an outcome of this kind is going to convince many people of the value of developing the European Union.
Let us move on to other matters.
The Charter is an unsuccessful exercise. Politics is being smothered by too much symbolism and an excessive insistence on unanimity.
If citizens are to feel involved in the European Union, its policies and institutions, then it is up to the Members of Parliament in particular to disclose more of the critical decisions, the contradictions, the divergent interests and projects driving the economic and social operators within the European arena.
Everyday topical events, from maritime transport to animal meal, show us that the markets and economic operators must be much better regulated and controlled and that established short-term profit-making interests must be opposed.
We need better European legislation to improve the quality of life for all and to improve social welfare systems.
This is our priority fight in order to ensure that the affirmation of fundamental rights is put into practice in our political decisions.
. (FR) The Social Democrats promised us that Europe would cease to be just an economic market, a single currency and a liberalising machine.
Enhanced with a "Charter of Fundamental Rights" , Social Europe would at long last take on a social character.
But nothing of the sort has been achieved.
This Charter represents a social step backwards as regards democracy and freedoms, falling short of the terms of the Treaties currently in force.
Great pressure had to be exerted before the right to join trade unions and the right to strike were at last included.
Except for a few general comments, women have the right to "marry" and "found a family" , while immigrants have the right not to be subjected to "collective expulsion" .
Social rights simply do not feature.
There is no right to work, just the "right to engage in work" ; there is no right to social protection or accommodation, just "the right to social assistance and housing assistance" ; there is no right to a retirement pension or a minimum income; there is no ban on redundancies, just the "right to protection against unjustified dismissal" .
In fact, the fight against social exclusion is relegated to the level of assistance, instead of imposing a requirement for basic rights binding upon employers and states.
Yet, on the other hand, the Charter of course gives the right to property and the freedom to conduct a business more than their due.
For all the above reasons, this Charter must not be incorporated into the Treaties of the European Union, and we cannot accept the text as it is currently worded.
. (FR) The procedure adopted for framing and adopting the Charter of Fundamental Rights really only leaves the European Parliament with a simple choice: to either accept or reject the current Charter.
Given that only have two options, my decision is unequivocally to vote in favour of the step forward which this Charter represents, however small that step forward may be in terms of the content and scope of the text.
First of all we should take another look at the approach adopted.
While the Convention method is a valuable one, and productive in terms of drawing up a basic text that is seeking a broad compromise, all the same nothing can justify depriving the European Parliament, the physical representatives of the peoples of Europe, of the opportunity to amend and enrich the text.
Yet when a historian looks into the way in which the 1789 Declaration of the Rights of Man and the Citizen or other similar international declarations were drawn up, he perceives the extent to which parliamentary debate and the amendment process were able to lend inspiration, significance and also ambition to these fundamental texts which are still powerful today.
At this time when debate in the institutions of Europe is being undertaken concomitantly with the Charter being adopted, all those men and women who, like myself, would like a European constitution and consider that this Charter may serve as the bare bones for the preamble to such a constitution should demand that the European Parliament be enabled to vote on the content, as part of its normal parliamentary business, which is basically deliberative.
In connection with this institutional debate, it is essential to incorporate the Charter into the Treaties of the European Union so that the rights that have been declared can be guaranteed for all and the state policies required to implement them can be developed either by the Member States or by the European Union itself, without conflicting with the existing legal texts.
It must be acknowledged that the law of free competition and the single market too often prevails over all other requirements and effectively flouts social rights and fundamental rights.
We have seen too many declarations that were not followed up in practice.
This is therefore the first priority: we must give this Charter real legal force.
Next, the actual content of the Charter is ambiguous and inadequate on some counts.
In the first place, there are discrepancies between the German and French versions which raise major questions about the references to "religious" or "spiritual" values.
Personally, I am convinced that secularism is a liberating factor for the modern world.
I deplore the ambiguity of these terms and also the lack of a clearer reference to secularity.
Secondly, the right to work is not directly stated.
Anyone can see that a provision stating that "every person has the right to work" is really not that ambitious.
The difference between not prohibiting access to work and taking action to make it possible to work is more than just a shade of meaning.
The Charter should have clearly stated the right to work, and indeed the right to housing, which was also expressed in a roundabout way, affording little protection.
The Charter must be improved, and the European Parliament must propose a strategy enabling it to be updated and enriched.
. (NL) I would not wish to deny that there are things in the Charter that I am able to endorse.
The same things are already to be found in the national constitutions, the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, and the European Social Charter.
In fact there is not a great deal in the Charter, despite the pressure brought to bear by the trade union movement, the environmental movement and human rights organisations.
This means that as a document, the Charter is surplus to requirements.
It is a propaganda document that creates the impression that something worthwhile has been achieved, when in reality this is not the case.
In addition, it is confusing from the legal perspective, as a result of which the powers of the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg are in competition with those of the European Court of Justice in Luxembourg.
As such, the Charter is no more than an instrument of propaganda designed to show what a good thing it is that we have a European Union and that everyone should think themselves lucky.
It does encroach on the national competences of the Member States but it does nothing for the European citizens.
Unless it is amended in such a way as to shift the emphasis to social fundamental rights and the environment, I will be unable to vote in favour of adopting the Charter.
. (DE) The Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union is an important step towards defining the general, common values of the European Union.
Nonetheless, I decided to abstain for the following reasons:
1.
The Charter sets out important fundamental rights.
However, in its present form, it fails to do justice to the demand for social justice, as I understand it, in several important areas.
It does not include the right to work or the right to housing.
Similarly, the social responsibility of ownership has been left out.
It has already been assumed that the Charter might form the basis for a European constitution.
That makes including fundamental social rights even more important.
2.
The Charter is the outcome of the work of a broad-based convention which sat in public.
That is, without doubt, an improvement on how documents of such fundamental importance are usually drafted.
Nonetheless, it does not substantiate the EU's claim to be a union of peoples and their citizens.
If the Charter is to be an expression of the common values of the people of the European Union, those people must be given an opportunity to debate it.
It should not therefore be decided and proclaimed at the Council summit in Nice; on the contrary, the summit should prompt a European debate on the Charter.
That would give us a chance to restore a Europe of the people and of broad civil involvement.
3.
The Charter contains some lofty claims but imposes no concomitant obligation and cannot therefore be enforced by the citizens of Europe.
The citizens' Europe we are striving for must establish such recourse.
For these reasons I abstained from voting during the plenary session of the European Parliament.
. I voted for the Charter of Fundamental Rights as a declaration of intent.
The basic clauses are not in dispute and should be supported by everyone.
There will be no shift in the balance of power between the EU and Member States.
This Charter is a declaratory document and clarifies the EU position - especially to those seeking to join the enlarged Europe.
We must, however, stand firmly against any campaign for a legally binding Charter that would only create legal uncertainty.
This document is clearly not one suited to become legally binding as it is not a legal text.
. (PT) I abstained in the vote on the Charter of Fundamental Rights because I felt that, before this was adopted or rejected, it was crucial to know what fate it would meet at the Nice European Council.
In future, will its clauses have a merely symbolic value or will they become binding for Community institutions and, consequently, for the European public?
We are very familiar with the position held by the majority in this Parliament.
In this catalogue of rights, the devotees of European federalism see the embryo of a future European Constitution, which the Member States' national constitutions will have to accommodate.
We understand their position when they try to give a qualitatively diverse political meaning to a text on fundamental rights, which is not only vague and all-encompassing, but is also going to be of arguable usefulness in an EU that has no serious shortcomings, either in the legal status of its rights or in the way in which these rights are defended and implemented.
Fortunately the prevailing tendency of national governments seems to indicate the sensible path to take, which is to see the Charter as having power that is merely political rather than binding.
The great political debate on the Charter will therefore take place firstly between national governments and then, eventually, when this Parliament is confronted with their decision.
Meanwhile, as I said at the beginning of this explanation of vote, the only approach I could adopt was to abstain from voting.
- (SV) This text concerning a Charter of Fundamental Rights contains many important wordings central to the principle of human dignity and, as Swedish Christian Democrats, we warmly welcome these.
Since there is a great deal of doubt in Sweden' s local authorities and county councils about the legitimacy and relevance of the Charter' s being made legally binding and about the extent to which the EU is in fact capable of fulfilling all the expectations the EU purports to guarantee, I have chosen to abstain from voting in this vote.
. In the debate in this chamber today, regarding the Charter of Fundamental Human Rights, the Commission representative stated that this Charter was a first step toward a legally binding document.
Speaker after speaker, with a few exceptions, referred to the need for a Europe with constitutional rights.
These statements confirm the concerns expressed within my country that this Charter is intended to be the preamble to a European Constitution.
Recently our Taoiseach, Mr Ahern, clearly stated that the European Charter of Fundamental Human Rights should remain a political, not a legal document.
Members of the Irish government have recently raised questions regarding whether Brussels threatens Irish identity and Mr Ahern, whilst affirming Ireland's EU membership as fundamental to its prosperity and economic success, firmly resisted any rapid movement to a more federal - centralised - Europe, as it would go well beyond what most Europeans currently wish for or are prepared to accept.
In the light of Ireland's national position and in tune with the wishes of my constituents, I must vote against this Charter of Fundamental Human Rights which, despite being a simple political statement at this time is, by all evidence, intended to be the preamble to a European Constitution which will take precedence over the constitution of my country and the will of the Irish people.
. (FR) I voted, most decidedly, against the draft Charter of Fundamental Rights before us.
I did so primarily to denounce the anti-democratic way in which it was produced.
From start to finish, the framing of the Charter gave rise to a series of takeovers by force:
A semantic appropriation, at the outset, regarding the name of the body drafting the Charter.
Established as "a body" by the Cologne Summit, it declared itself a "Convention" , a name with unfortunate connotations of 1793 when the French Revolution degenerated into the Reign of Terror under another "Convention" .
An appropriation of parliamentary authority.
The Court of Justice is going to be able to impose the terms of this text, whose definitive version was finalised by a Praesidium operating in a far from transparent manner, upon the citizens of our countries, even though it will not even have been ratified by our national parliaments, who, nonetheless, have exclusive jurisdiction over human rights issues!
As for the Members of the European Parliament, they were not only refused the right to table amendments to the text of the Charter, but were also forced to vote on the Charter as a whole, which runs counter to the most basic democratic rules.
A takeover instigated against a whole raft of fundamental rights which, worryingly, were discarded from the text.
So, for example, the absolutely basic fundamental right of the child to live with its father and mother, even though such a provision was expressly and insistently requested by a number of "Convention" members, was not adopted.
The basic right to a nation, which was also demanded and which is also fundamental, was also censored.
Any references to the religious heritage of our nations, even though this is explicitly mentioned in the majority of the fundamental texts governing our States, including France, making reference to the Supreme Being, and even though such references were included in the initial text of the Charter, were eliminated following pressure from several sides but particularly, it appears, from the representatives at the highest level of some Member States, in the name of an obscurantism which mistakes the exclusion of any religious reference from the state sector for legitimate secularism.
In the end, the haggling that this type of process inevitably leads to resulted in our weighing the notion of Europeans' "religious heritage" against the promotion of "free enterprise" .
No surprise as to what won the day.
The limitations of the rule of consensus applied in this sort of context may be gauged by observing the Ubuesque and frankly grotesque choices it gives rise to.
Ultimately there is nothing European about the text of the Charter.
As it stands, it could be adopted by just about any country in the whole world.
The lot of processes of this nature is to produce texts which necessarily boil down to the lowest common denominator.
The value of the content of such an exercise, quite apart from its illegitimacy, given that the European Union has no jurisdiction in the field of human rights, cannot clearly be seen since, in Europe, our freedoms are protected remarkably well by the founding texts of our nations and by the European Convention on Human Rights.
The method used, the cuts made and the ambiguity surrounding the very nature of the text, on the other hand, shed a harsh light on the new totalitarian agitators at work at the very heart of the process of European integration.
Marinho Report (A5-0313/2000)
Madam President, Mr Marinho's document is a step towards establishing the future European criminal legal system.
Pensioners are in favour of strengthening criminal law, European law especially, as well as national law, for I am afraid that crimes are no longer committed solely by our citizens but by people of other nationalities as well.
Pensioners and elderly people fall victim to criminal acts more frequently than anyone else - not major crime, of course, of the sort leading to money laundering, which is what we are combating here, but those related petty criminal acts which make life difficult for everybody and the elderly in particular.
(FR) Last night we examined four draft texts on combating organised crime which, on the whole, are to be welcomed, even if the reports and amendments from the European Parliament are themselves more questionable.
These texts have two points in common.
Firstly, they are mutually complementary, extending Europol' s competence, setting up a Provisional Judicial Cooperation Unit, improving reciprocal assistance in judicial matters between Member States and defining more clearly the conditions for the fight against money laundering which is the result, or the cause, or in any case a necessary component in a great many very serious crimes.
Next, these texts are all based on initiatives by Member States, coming under either the third pillar of Article 67 of the Treaty Establishing the European Community, where the Commission does not have the monopoly on the right of initiative.
Let me point out in passing that seven of the reports presented during this part-session have been in response to national initiatives, proving that where this system is implemented, it is proving to be very productive.
Moreover, it is developing forms of cooperation that give greater respect to national sovereignty, as is shown by the initiative of the French Republic dealt with in the Roure report, which manages to reconcile mutual assistance in judicial matters and respect for the key interests of the Member States.
We supported these initiatives in general, except where the European Parliament amendments were tending to introduce too much of a federalist bias.
We do, however, deeply regret the fact that a fifth text, the Ceyhun report on the two initiatives by the French Republic seeking to step up controls on illegal immigration was referred back to committee.
The arguments put forward by the European Parliament are completely fallacious.
The fact is, this House wishes to interfere with everything but draws the line at supporting the decisions which nonetheless lie at the heart of the responsibilities of States in order to protect their own peoples.
Fortunately, in this field, the European Parliament still has only a consultative role until the Treaty of Amsterdam is fully implemented, yet it is still finding occasion to abuse this role by putting the brake on reasonable decisions.
. (FR) I have already expressed my views, this year, on the proposal for an amendment of the 1991 directive on money laundering.
The European Parliament had already pinpointed the omissions in this directive, and the Commission recently tabled a proposal taking Parliament' s comments into consideration.
The Council' s common position has not been officially recognised.
The report under discussion today is a direct result of the commitment made at the European Council in Tampere, in October 1999, to combat this scourge of money laundering which amounts to between 2 and 5% of the world' s GDP every year.
The French Presidency made this one of the priorities on its agenda, and has therefore planned a set of legislative measures to create a legal framework broad enough to encompass the crime of money laundering.
We have had proposals, firstly, to extend Europol' s competence to cover money laundering - the Karamanou report - and, secondly, for a raft of measures to improve international cooperation in the field of mutual assistance in criminal matters - the Roure report.
These two reports were put to the vote today, and I voted in favour of them.
The Marinho report now seeks to extend the principle of the mutual recognition of national measures for the identification, tracing, freezing, seizing and confiscation of instrumentalities and the proceeds from crime, established by the Joint Action 98/699/JHA in 1998, to decisions in the pre-court phase, especially those enabling the competent authorities to take rapid action to obtain evidence and seize easily transportable assets.
These proactive measures are absolutely essential in order to combat this phenomenon, which has continually grown and taken on an international dimension.
As Conclusion 51 of the Tampere European Council states, "Money laundering is at the very heart of organised crime.
It should be rooted out wherever it occurs."
I therefore voted in favour of the Marinho report, and in support of the endeavours of the French Presidency.
- (DA) Even if we support the fight against money laundering and can therefore also endorse the need to equip the relevant authorities with the right tools for the job, we cannot vote in favour of Mr Marinho' s report.
Because this report, together with the reports of Mrs Karamanou and Mrs Roure, which we are also voting on today, set the scene for harmonising the Member States' procedures under criminal law for establishing maximum and minimum penalties for money laundering, an indirect step is being taken towards developing a common European legal system with courts, police, judges, judicial system etc, a development we neither can nor wish to support.
In any case, the fight against money laundering takes place on a number of levels and, to start with, we see no need to establish maximum and minimum penalties for this at Community level.
. (DE) Obviously it makes sense and we need to combat money laundering.
However, there are differing interpretations as to how this can be achieved.
If we set minimum penalties in this framework resolution, we shall come up against elementary rule of law problems.
If we set minimum penalties, we shall be contradicting cleverly worked-out national criminal codes.
We need to approximate, not unify our criminal codes.
Under the rule of law and democracy, criminal codes represent very core of national sovereignty and the Member States should therefore be left to set them.
. I welcome this report.
Special action against money laundering was proposed in Tampere in 1999.
The European Council, noting that serious forms of crime increasingly have tax and duty aspects, called upon the Members States to provide full mutual legal assistance in the investigation and prosecution of this type of crime and for the approximation of criminal law and procedures on money laundering.
It was accepted that the principle of mutual recognition should also apply to pre-trial orders, in particular to those which would enable competent authorities quickly to secure evidence and seize assets, which are easily moveable.
Through this initiative the French Presidency proposes the adoption of a framework decision for the approximation of criminal law and procedures on money laundering (e.g. tracing, freezing and confiscating funds).
The adoption of this report and the French initiative will undoubtedly assist in the fight against money laundering.
- (NL) There is often a fine line between business activities and white-collar crime.
The drugs and arms trades, illegal waste dumping, leaving consumers non-plussed with poor quality products, banking secrecy and tax havens undoubtedly contribute to the much championed economic growth.
Yet they clearly run counter to the interests of human beings and the conservation of our environment.
The right to property appears almost to be sacrosanct.
That was the case a century ago, and although there was a crack down, it is now back in full force.
Therefore any move to improve our chances of depriving those who profit from illegal financial practices of their gains, is a step in the right direction.
This subject has also been seized on with a view to enhancing cooperation between European police forces.
It sometimes seems as though this objective takes precedence over the fight against white-collar crime.
In practice, such cooperation could primarily be deployed, once in a while, for purposes other than the fight against money laundering.
This has an adverse effect on the rights of citizens who do not commit such crimes.
Therefore the best solution would be for banks and other enterprises to place their books fully in the public domain, and to develop democratic control over the economy.
. I congratulate my Socialist colleague, Mr Marinho, for his excellent report on strengthening the fight against international money laundering and organised crime.
Crime is one of the greatest concerns of our constituents and many strongly support criminals being put under lock and key. We must be tough on crime and tough on the causes of crime so that from Manchester to Madrid, our citizens are safe and are afforded full protection from criminals throughout Europe.
Money laundering feeds the trade in drug-trafficking.
Existing EU law is clearly not enough to stem the tide of the reported USD 590 billion which is laundered world-wide every year.
We welcome the French Presidency's initiative aimed at improving cooperation between national authorities responsible for tackling money laundering and laying down uniform penalties.
All Member States should treat money laundering as a criminal offence carrying a minimum sentence of four years' imprisonment.
Further measures are being voted on by the European Parliament this week in our efforts to crack down on international crime.
We are looking to extend the remit of Europol - the European Police Cooperation Unit - to cover serious international crime.
We also want to remove legal barriers which prevent the extradition of suspected criminals accused of money laundering or other related offences involving illicit funds.
This will be an important tool in allowing criminals to be tried across Europe.
These reports are crucial if the single market is not to become a free market for criminals.
The last thing we want is that the single market allows criminals to enter the single market unseen by the back door.
These measures drafted by Socialist MEPs are an important step in combating international crime and I urge the House to support these reports.
Karamanou Report (A5-0312/2000)
Madam President, I voted for the Karamanou report, whose objective is also of major importance: the creation of a European Police Office.
However, a question mark has formed in my mind because, the other day, a pensioner, Mrs Lucia Boroni, said to me: 'I was walking down the road when someone ran off with my handbag.
Then I saw a policeman nearby with a badge saying 'European Policeman' on his jacket, and I asked him: "Why aren't you chasing that thief who has stolen my handbag?"
And the policeman replied: 'Because of the principle of not interfering in national responsibilities, the principle of subsidiarity.
That thief was Italian: an Italian policeman should have been chasing him.
I am the future European policeman'.'
I hope that this question mark remains nothing more than a question mark!
We shall see ...
. Although we will support the report, we, as British Conservatives, have particular reservations regarding certain aspects of the report, as follows: extension of QMV - in respect of Europol the Council will act by a two-thirds majority in accordance with Article VI of the Treaty (Article 1 (1b) - Amendment No 3); centralising Europol's powers - the Court of Justice will have jurisdiction to rule on any dispute or conflict between Member States regarding the interpretation or application of the Convention (Article 1 (1d) - Amendment No 5).
. While welcoming closer cooperation between the Member States' police forces both amongst themselves and through Europol, I share the rapporteur' s concerns about the lack of democratic accountability of Europol.
As money laundering assumes vast proportions throughout the world it is clear that Europol should have the powers to combat it, with a view to devising a European strategy for police and judicial cooperation.
However, it is vital that national parliaments and the European Parliament have access to information on Europol's activities in order to ensure political accountability and that there is a role for the European Court to ensure judicial accountability.
Roure Report (A5-0314/2000)
Madam President, I voted for the Roure report, which is also a document which fights crime by adapting criminal legislation.
However, also in this regard, I have to say that, last Saturday, I was in Curno, the municipality where I live, outside the bank where pensioners go to draw their pensions each month. I saw an extremely long queue of pensioners and elderly people.
One of them, the last in the line, recognised me and asked me: 'Why is this queue so long?' .
I went to find out and came back to her with the reply: 'They are carrying out checks to make sure that none of the money is dirty, in observance of the new legislation' .
'I don't care,' said the pensioner. 'Clean or dirty, I need my pension money.'
There you are. This is an example of what I hope will not happen when this document is implemented.
. (ES) The parties that I represent in this House, Eusko Alkartasuna and Esquerra Republicana de Catalunya, fully support the Roure report on improving judicial cooperation in criminal matters, particularly in the area of combating organised crime, the laundering of the proceeds from crime and financial crime.
We also support the future establishment of a convention to help combat organised crime and money laundering, and the various measures proposed in order to achieve those purposes.
The idea of creating an area of freedom, security and justice in Europe is, obviously, an aspiration that we share.
We feel that the strict limitation of the reasons for which the Member States may refuse to provide judicial cooperation solely to "essential interests," thus excluding the notions of sovereignty, public order and national security in force up until now is a step forward, but is still inadequate.
This is mainly because we still find it unacceptable for a State to be able to invoke a "general interest" in order to be able to deny judicial cooperation in criminal matters.
This shows, once again, that the Member States have a long way to go in understanding the meaning of shared sovereignty.
Moreover, I should point out, as a Member representing Basques and Catalans, that there continues to be an emphasis on cooperation between States, without taking into account that in the EU other police forces operate that are not State bodies.
This report and, in general, the area of freedom, safety and justice in Europe, is based on democracy and on the rule of law that should reign in the EU.
Therefore, what most concerns me about the future of legal cooperation in the EU is that currently some States are proposing criminal reforms that are bordering on the violation of human rights.
As you will be aware, the Spanish government has initiated a reform of criminal law to make sentences tougher for certain types of crimes.
Specifically, this special legislation is considering sentences of up to ten years in prison for children of 14 years of age, not to mention other measures.
Ladies and gentlemen, we are convinced that Europe needs to construct the area of freedom, security and justice that we so often cite in our speeches.
We will be the first to support it.
However, I would like to draw your attention to the possible reforms of criminal law that could take place in various Member States such as Spain, for example, with the Partido Popular in power - which is taking advantage of a certain situation - because these reforms are still a concern for the Europe of freedom and democracy.
. I welcome Mrs Roure' s report on another initiative from the French Presidency - this time to step up cooperation in the legal area to ensure that no barriers are put in place to prevent the extradition of suspected criminals accused of money laundering or other related offences involving illicit funds.
The draft convention proposes that banking secrecy may not be used as a reason to refuse a request from another Member State for information on somebody suspected of being involved in financial crime.
In addition, the idea is that, on request, Member States should furnish details of all bank accounts held by suspects.
The aim of the new convention is to oblige the Member States actively to pursue suspicious transactions.
Gebhardt Report (A5-0317/2000)
Madam President, this is a document - which I voted for - which is intended to establish gradually, step by step, a European public prosecution service.
In fact, a provisional cooperation unit is being set up, composed of a representative of the judges or police officers with equivalent competence from each of our 15 Member States.
However, I would have hoped that this body would also have included representatives of the lawyers of each of the 15 States, for I feel that, at a time when we have to establish something new in the legal area, it would be beneficial to consult not only the judges who judge but also the lawyers, who have a great deal of experience in the field.
And I am not saying this merely because my daughter has recently graduated as a fully-fledged lawyer.
- (DA) The Gebhardt report' s undisguised intention to institutionalise judicial cooperation and make it into a supranational affair by setting up Eurojust is based upon a highly problematic premise.
There is not just one, but there are fifteen different legal systems in the EU.
Working these different legal traditions into the EU' s bureaucracies could lead to an élitist and non-transparent system without any form of democratic support. Nor will such a system be able to solve the problems faced by the Member States.
We are also strongly opposed to the ambition to make the EU into a constitutional State by establishing 'independent legislative, executive and judiciary' bodies 'with counterbalancing powers' .
It is still the Member States, as constitutional States, which must be at the heart of European cooperation.
That is why we are voting against the report.
Langenhagen Report (A5-0310/2000)
Madam President, this is the only report which I voted against.
I voted against this document because I was astounded to find that the explanatory statement of the rapporteur, Mrs Langenhagen, clearly affirms that the procedures for implementing this programme, which has distributed EUR 665 million, have been irregular.
I regret to say that it informs us that some of the members of the committees responsible for allocating the European funds for research in the sectors of hunting and fisheries also benefited from this research.
I therefore feel that we should be much more careful in carrying out our financial activities in respect of research programmes than we are at present.
(The sitting was suspended at 12.52 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m.)
Turkey (continuation)
Mr President, as a member of the EU-Turkey Joint Parliamentary Committee, I take a close interest in Turkey's accession prospects.
I should like today to highlight Mr Morillon's call for a European-Turkish discussion forum in the House and for a debate on Turkey's accession prospects in the national parliaments in our Member States.
This is important for Turkey, but it is even more important for the Member States themselves and for our citizens.
Our governments agreed to Turkey's accession prospects in Helsinki.
The people of Turkey were surprised by this decision and many still fail to understand it.
This is because Turkey's own people have been offered no forum for discussion, with the result that the issue is being discussed subliminally, in ignorance and without any knowledge of the background to the Helsinki decision.
This is giving rise to an anti-attitude which we cannot afford in the Union, given the large number of Turkish immigrants already living here, and which, given the increase in xenophobia, we must not afford.
My Turkish counterparts in the Turkish Grand National Assembly are also complaining about this deplorable state of affairs in which no-one wants to talk to them openly, no-one from the national governments or parliaments and, to all intents and purposes, no-one from the European institutions.
Of course there are informal discussions, but there are, to all intents and purposes, no official meetings.
One almost gets the impression that there is a sort of gentlemen's agreement to talk about Turkey's accession only behind closed doors.
What is everyone afraid of?
Was the Helsinki decision premature?
The initial euphoria of the Council and Commission has clearly waned.
Apart from declarations of intent, so far Turkey has made no fundamental progress towards meeting the political criteria.
Consequently, there is even more need now, almost one year on from Helsinki, for Turkey's accession prospects to be debated in our national parliaments and with our citizens.
We owe it both to Turkey and to our own people, and this sort of discussion will perhaps help to integrate the Turkish immigrants already living in our midst.
Mr President, if Turkey were a member of the EU, it would be the most populous Member State after Germany.
It would be the first Member State geographically to bridge the gulf between Europe and Asia and to have a mainly Muslim tradition.
Unfortunately, it is a country which is not only large but which also has an unstable feel about it when it comes to democracy.
All these factors go to show that Turkey' s application for membership of the EU is one of the most important issues for the EU' s future.
The Commission' s latest report on enlargement confirms that progress has been made but also highlights large deficits in terms of democracy, human rights and the treatment of ethnic minorities such as the Kurds.
Turkey has not come so far as had been hoped.
Torture is still practised, and the military plays far too large a political role.
Turkey' s role in Cyprus is also unacceptable.
My role here is to represent the members of the Group of the Party of European Socialists in the Committee on Budgets.
It is, of course, economic considerations that are at issue.
From an economic point of view, poverty, inflation and budget deficits are general problems, like the uneven social distribution of the results of economic progress.
Major structural reforms are needed in these areas.
Mr Seppänen' s report is about increasing the European Investment Bank' s powers and mandate to take action in Turkey.
Seen from an institutional point of view, this issue is crucially linked to the Customs Union with Turkey, which has existed for many years.
That Customs Union nonetheless needs to be strengthened by means of a special programme of measures from the European Investment Bank because the latter does not see Turkey as belonging yet to that circle of countries entitled to pre-accession aid.
We see it as a matter of great urgency for the EU, through the EIB, to support development so that Turkey might as soon as possible set a practical process in motion with a view to fulfilling the Copenhagen Criteria.
That is why the demands for democracy and human rights must also find expression in the EIB' s financing activity.
In practical terms, this is about the opportunities for granting loans for projects in Turkey amounting to EUR 450 million between now and 2004.
Certainly, Turkey is already entitled to loans in a number of connections, but the Commission now wants to invest in economic development, especially where the infrastructure is concerned, in order to strengthen the country' s economic competitiveness.
Allow me to comment on the procedure in terms of principle, leaving aside the point at issue.
This is a consultation procedure, but it would be reasonable, of course, for it to be a codecision procedure because these decisions can in actual fact lead to the Budget's having to be adjusted.
That particularly applies at this stage when we are progressively committing more and more of the EIB' s resources, but without fully covering the financial risks we are taking.
When the EIB grants loans to countries other than the Member States, Parliament ought also to be consulted about the political priorities to be set in what is a part of the Bank' s activity mainly motivated by foreign policy.
The immediate Budget problem is that there is a danger of there being no margin left in the guarantee fund reserve.
We are increasing the Investment Bank' s commitments, but we are not increasing the EU Budget' s loan guarantee reserve to the same degree, and we have undertaken to provide 65% finance if a loan cannot be repaid.
The residual guarantee fund reserve is now so low that it may prevent the Union from using the EIB as an instrument if new events should occur, requiring initiatives of this nature.
In spite of this concern, the Committee on Budgets nonetheless proposes that Parliament approve the Commission' s proposal.
However, we back the rapporteur' s criticism that there is at present no effective assessment of the EIB' s loan operations and that there are deficiencies when it comes to public scrutiny and democratic control of the Bank' s activity.
If we shall nonetheless be voting in favour of the proposal, it is because we think it important to contribute to more positive development in those areas where Turkey is still falling down, especially the economic area.
Mr Morillon has written a good report stressing that neither religious objections nor geo-strategic considerations are the decisive factors for Turkey's accession.
The challenge for Turkey in fulfilling the Copenhagen criteria is to reform not only the constitution but also its political and intellectual inspiration.
In Western Europe ideas of pluralism and differentiated identities within the same State have led to recognition of cultural, linguistic and political rights and devolution.
Turkey needs to adopt these modern European notions of diversity and the right to be different.
The Kemalist ideology that was modern in 1930 is not so in 2000.
Hence my amendments on the need for a political solution for the Kurdish people.
It is unacceptable that the Commission omitted any mention of the Kurds from the accession partnership document, though they have been referred to in successive regular reports and Mr Verheugen mentioned them this morning.
I hope Parliament and the Council will remedy that omission.
It does not help Turkey or the European Union to fight shy of this issue, the biggest single cause of Turkey's poor human rights record.
Until there is a solution for the Kurds there will be no fulfilment of the Copenhagen criteria and I therefore call upon Parliament to pass my amendments, and on the Council and Parliament to insist that a solution for the Kurds is a key to unlocking the problems of Turkey fulfilling the Copenhagen criteria.
Mr President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, Commissioner, as a member of the delegation to the parliamentary cooperation committees for relations with the three countries of the southern Caucasus - Armenia, Azerbaijan and Georgia - I wholeheartedly support Mr Morillon' s report, particularly Article 18, which calls on the Turkish Government to improve its relations with its neighbours in the Caucasus.
While there is a special relationship between Azerbaijan and Turkey, this is far from being the case for Armenia, a country against which Turkey is maintaining a commercial blockade, which is not acceptable in a country which has been accepted as a candidate for membership of the European Union.
The dispute relating to acknowledgement of the Armenian genocide should also be waived in order to enable diplomatic and trade relations to be normalised, especially as Turkey plays a key role in the project for the construction of an oil pipeline taking petroleum from the Caspian Sea to the Turkish port of Ceyhan on the Mediterranean.
Turkey also needs to take on board environmental considerations, particularly in schemes such as the construction of major dams, which will necessarily have an impact on the water systems of neighbouring countries.
Mr President, I should like to congratulate General Morillon on what is, under the circumstances, a most balanced report.
We all know how difficult it is under such difficult circumstances to deal efficiently with successive efforts to serve political, economic and other purposes and interests at the expense of principles and rules of law and generally using two yardsticks and two sets of scales.
That is why the frankness which runs through the Morillon report deserves special mention, although fewer excuses at some points in the report would, I think, have reflected the factors used to evaluate Turkey's progress towards accession more accurately.
In this context, I would like to reiterate the basic conclusion in paragraph 22 that Turkey does not meet the Copenhagen criteria and draw attention both to the fact that Turkey has been condemned on numerous occasions for acts and omissions in relation to human rights, democratic freedoms and its international attitude and to the European Parliament's recommendations that Turkey comply with the relevant European values.
On the other hand, although paragraphs 9, 10, 12 and 17 expressly refer to infringements of these values by Turkey on numerous occasions, especially by the Turkish occupying army in Cyprus, which Turkey is called on to withdraw, the fact remains that it would have been preferable to roundly condemn Turkey's present and past responsibility for problems caused by its intransigence and the resultant impasse on the Cyprus question - where, it should be noted, there are clear signs of Turkey's intention to provoke a new heated crisis -, its failure to abide by international conventions with its expansionist policy towards Greece, its concealment of the historical truth of the Armenian genocide and its disregard for the fundamental minority rights of the Kurds.
Something along these lines might have been more helpful, including for Turkey, because it would have sent a more accurate message to the forces in Turkey which really do intend to modernise the country and it would have supported their efforts to put conditions in place which guarantee its European prospects, giving them serious arguments with which to convince the many sceptics that those prospects are, in fact, well-founded.
Mr President, Mr President-in-Office, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, the President-in-Office said this morning, this is a highly topical debate because it coincides with the documents presented by the Commission - the report on Turkey's progress and of course, more importantly, the accession partnership.
This is the first serious step on the road towards Turkey's accession and the accession process can now move into the practical application stage.
We, for our part, welcome this.
Turkey, for all its differences, always was and still is an integral part of Europe.
Old feuds cannot deny Turkey its place in the life of the Member States of the European Union.
If Europe can accept Turkey for what it is and welcome it into the European family, with all its differences, it will, I think, have made a quantum political and cultural leap.
It will have demonstrated that our values are catholic values which seek not to iron out the differences between the partners but to assimilate their differences and peculiarities.
Of course, in order for there to be assimilation, there must be common ground.
Our rapporteur has identified and brought Turkey's attention to this common ground in his really excellent report, for which I too wish to thank him.
The common ground is democracy and it presupposes freedom of opinion, i.e. equal human and political rights for everyone, irrespective of national origin, and the right to choose a government in free elections, in truly free elections and only in free elections, something which is, of course, incompatible with autonomous centres of power, especially autonomous centres of excessive military power.
What more could one ask of the Morillon report?
Only, perhaps, that it might have stated more clearly at this point that there can be no democracy in Turkey and there can be no accession by Turkey unless the military is stripped of its excessive, constitutionally-protected powers.
Democracy is compatible with institutionalised civil functions for the armed forces; it is not compatible with fundamental military intervention in political life, irrespective of whether or not it is sanctioned constitutionally.
It is only natural to expect a democratic country to display a peaceful attitude towards its neighbours, especially if they happen to be future partners.
And from this point of view, the report is right to condemn the bombing of Kendakor by the Turkish air force and to highlight and reiterate the Turkish Government's obligation to support negotiations between Turkish and Greek Cypriots without preliminary conditions.
What is worrying is that Turkish officials and the Turkish press seems to be taking a reactionary stand, rather than encouraging Turkey to move in this direction.
I trust that Turkey will start to take a more serious view of things and understand just what its obligations are.
Mr President, it is a matter of regret that our debate today has been marred by a small cluster of hostile amendments.
These have been put forward by the TDI, GUE et al.
I find them unseemly, ill-advised, untimely and inappropriate because these are amendments which use three words - "genocide", "Muslim" and "Asian" - in a way that is racist, derogatory and discriminatory and which causes impenetrable and false barriers to be erected against Turkey's accession to the Union.
Muslims follow one of the three Abrahaminic faiths.
Islam is the brother of Christianity and Judaism.
"Asian", in this context, is used as a racist term to be deplored and dropped.
As regards genocide: Turkey is not responsible for the Armenian massacre.
If we accept that, do we then place all of the Ottoman Empire's crimes against humanity at modern Turkey's door?
Indeed, the UN Convention of 1948 has not been broadened to include the Armenian tragedy.
Until that happens I do not think this Parliament should act differently.
I welcome Turkey's careful progress towards the Union and I support the Commission and the Morillon report.
Turkey' s accession to the European Union is an issue that has become even more topical.
Unlike some others, I am not stirring up the religious argument in order to put off this prospect. This cannot, however, be just a formality.
I am thinking, instead, of acknowledgement of the Armenian genocide of 1915.
In the country currently holding the Presidency of the European Union, the French National Senate recently at last proclaimed this significant act of public recognition, two and a half years after the French National Assembly.
Acknowledging this act of genocide does not mean that the present-day Turkey is a barbaric nation.
Quite the contrary, a nation only grows in stature by facing up to its past.
How could Europe maintain its credibility with regard to the state violence perpetrated in the world today, even, at times, including genocide, if it were to embrace Turkey as a Member while brushing aside its history?
Furthermore, the ongoing denial and repression of the Kurdish people is as appalling as it is unacceptable.
The Turkish parliamentarian, Leyla Zana, winner of the Sakharov Prize, and in prison since 1995 merely for haven spoken in Kurdish within the Turkish Parliament, is still languishing in prison.
These are facts that the European Parliament has highlighted on a number of occasions. There is no justification for our omitting them today.
Mr President, Paragraph 17 of Mr Morillon' s report states that the European Parliament 'calls on the Turkish Government to withdraw its occupation forces from northern Cyprus' .
I am myself the author of this wording in the form of Amendment 72, adopted by the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy on 10 October 2000.
I should particularly like to address Mr Verheugen, as the Commissioner with responsibility for enlargement, and also the French Presidency.
Almost 40 per cent of Cyprus is occupied by foreign troops in the form of Turkish soldiers.
Eleven years after the fall of the Berlin Wall, Nicosia is now Europe' s only divided capital.
Historically, Cyprus - the island of Saint Paul and Saint Barnabas - has not previously been divided, but has now been so for 26 years due to a foreign invasion.
The EU' s four freedoms cannot be applied to the whole of Cyprus following the partition.
Is it possible for Turkey to begin membership negotiations at all without the four freedoms' being applied in Cyprus?
Must not Nicosia become a united city and Cyprus a united country?
Must not the occupying troops be withdrawn?
Previous speakers referred to the genocide in Armenia.
This took place only 24 years before Hitler' s time and before the Second World War, when Hitler began the annihilation of the Jews.
He himself referred to this genocide as if it were something forgotten.
Turkey must come to terms with the truth.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Mr Morillon has made a comment under Recital D in his report which should, I think, play an important role in this debate.
Mr Morillon says that Turkey should try not to perceive the European Union as an exclusive Christian club which wants to keep it, Turkey, out.
This premise presupposes that the opposite holds true within the European Union, i.e. that we are not an exclusive Christian club which wants, can or should exclude Turkey on relativistic religious or cultural grounds.
The premise should be that a country with a laicistic constitution inhabited predominantly by Moslems which is based on the values on which the European Union itself is founded - i.e. freedom, equality and tolerance - could enrich the European Union.
The European Union is not founded on religious values, it is founded on values which we owe to the Enlightenment and which, quite independently of the religious leanings of a person or a country and its inhabitants, find their way into the constitutions of the Member States and, as we have seen during today's debate on the Charter of Fundamental Rights, into the EU's perception of fundamental rights.
This means that, as a democratic state under the rule of law with separation of powers and fundamental values as we understand them, Turkey will enrich the European Union.
At the same time, however, it is clear from Mr Morillon's report that Turkey is nowhere near meeting these demands.
The Copenhagen criteria are, admittedly, economic criteria, but they are also criteria which are centred around precisely these points.
The question is, how far have tolerance, democratic rule of law, separation of powers and respect for the separation of powers been put into practice in Turkey?
And the answer is, as Mr Morillon's report makes clear, not far enough.
Too little progress has been made and Turkey must do better.
Mr President, this debate is not about how the European Union will integrate into Turkey; it is about how Turkey will integrate into the European Union.
I agree with that entirely and I think that the report by the honourable Member shows how this can be achieved.
I should therefore like to turn to the Commissioner and the President-in-Office and ask them, given their level of support for the Morillon report - as they themselves have said -, why they were so lacking in inspiration and loath to include in the accession partnership which they formulated issues such as the Kurds, the Cyprus question and peaceful, non-threatening coexistence with Turkey's neighbouring countries, issues which have been left out of the basic debate with Turkey.
As far as the Armenian genocide is concerned I fully agree that it should not be a precondition to Turkey's accession.
However, the debate here is about what we have to say and what we remember.
Turkey will become an essentially democratic country once it learns to live with its past, just as democratic Germany has learned to live with its past - we asked the same of it.
Mr President, I should like to offer General Morillon my warmest congratulations on his report, in which he has combined perceptiveness with clarity.
In addition to explaining how far Turkey is from complying with the Copenhagen criteria, Mr Morillon also lists and enumerates what additional conditions Turkey must meet.
They include the Cyprus question, the role of the Turkish army, especially the national security council, the all-powerful position of which is out of keeping with the principle of democracy, the Kurdish question, which is of paramount importance, and last but not least, the virulent conflict with Greece which Turkey must endeavour to defuse.
Commissioner Verheugen has explained to the House that, first and foremost, the political criteria must be met.
As you all know, our group was highly sceptical about Turkey's candidate status but we are delighted, now that Turkey has candidate status, that it is on the ball and has decided to engage in a process of reform in order to meet the demands of the European Union.
Turkey is being responsible.
I should like to mention a number of economic criteria, such as the high rate of inflation which was over 100% and which is still over 50%, the high national debt as the result of the strain on the national budget from military expenditure and the military conflict with the PKK, high real interest rates, the continuing predominance of the public sector, huge regional differences in Turkey, a prosperity differential within Turkey of 1:10, which the European Union will never be able to bring under control, different educational qualifications, illiteracy, which still affects 27.6% of women, i.e. problems which Turkey itself must resolve.
The optimism of people such as deputy prime minister Mesut Yilmaz, who believes that the Maastricht criteria will be met as early as 2002, is to my mind exaggerated.
Turkey must know that it has embarked on a difficult journey, that it will have to give up its sovereignty and will have to exert itself.
We want to support it on this journey, not obstruct it and, above all, we want to keep our financial promises.
Mr President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I should like to speak in this debate in my capacity as the author of the report on the accession of Cyprus.
Since both Turkey and Cyprus are candidates for membership of the European Union, it is increasingly clear that a solution to the Cypriot question is becoming a matter of internal policy.
Commission Verheugen has confirmed that the Cyprus issue plays a very important part in the discussions currently being conducted with Turkey.
Given the political and military presence of Turkey in the northern part of the island of Cyprus, this could not fail to be the case.
Our rapporteur, Mr Morillon, deserves our congratulations for stipulating that a solution to the Cyprus problem must be one of the preconditions for Turkey' s accession.
'It is hard to understand today,' he writes, 'how it can remain divided by a wall, while in many other places such walls have crumbled over the past decade.'
In order for this outdated wall to be brought down, it is now essential for Turkey to comply with the Security Council resolutions requiring it to withdraw its occupying forces from the northern part of the island.
Paragraph 17 of our motion for a resolution explicitly calls for this.
It is high time that Turkey listened to the Turkish Cypriots, the great majority of whom wish to overcome the divisions of the past and join Europe alongside the Greek citizens of Cyprus.
If, on the other hand, Turkey continues to fuel the separatist, even annexationist impulses of the unofficial government of northern Cyprus, then it will be responsible for causing the proximity talks to fail.
In the medium term, an attitude of this kind would be an insurmountable obstacle to Turkey' s accession.
One of the three conditions stipulated in the Morillon report, a condition that the European Parliament will be adopting, would still remain unfulfilled.
Once the Ankara Government has understood that the status quo is not acceptable to Europe or to the rest of the world, then considerable progress may be made: the island may be reunified, and a fair and lasting global settlement may be achieved tomorrow in compliance with international law.
Mr President, there is much in this resolution on Turkey's progress towards accession which is commendable - in particular the call to the Commission to implement a properly resourced pre-accession strategy.
But where is the real welcome for the Helsinki decision to accord Turkey candidate status?
Where is the recognition in the resolution of the remarkable efforts, and I quote here from the explanatory statement that accompanied the resolution, 'the remarkable efforts that Turkey is making to adapt its structures to EU requirements'?
In fact what a pity that Turkey was not discussed during the wider enlargement debate in the context of the other candidate countries.
Of course peoples of Kurdish origins as well as other cultural and linguistic minorities must not be subjected to political, economic or other discrimination and must have the opportunity to express themselves freely, but this expression should be through entirely peaceful means and without intimidation and terrorism.
We should remember that the removal of Turkey from the western orbit was a prime objective of Soviet policy throughout the Cold War period and that the PKK was supported as an instrument of this policy.
Where is the demand in this resolution that the representatives of minorities should renounce violence?
Civil peace is a prerequisite for investment and economic progress.
Terrorism has been a barrier to such progress.
We should also be clear that the resolution of extraordinarily difficult problems such as Cyprus, which requires the assent of all the people of Cyprus, will not be helped by frustrating Turkish progress towards accession.
After all Turkey, along with Greece and the United Kingdom, is one of the guarantor powers in relation to Cyprus.
I detect increasing nervousness in this Parliament about the potential impact of the accession of Turkey on the Union.
I might say there is increasing nervousness among the citizens of many of the current Member States about the pace and intensity of political integration within the EU and the leftist thread which runs through the fabric of this development and is increasingly visible.
How much more desirable and acceptable would be the goal of a looser community of nation-states trading freely and acting in unison over a limited range of policy areas and how much easier it would then be to accommodate a country such as Turkey.
Mr President, we cannot vote in favour of the Morillon report due because we are convinced that, contrary to what is being maintained and what many people in Turkey hope, the accession process will not improve the standard of living of the people.
On the contrary, it will make it worse.
The real purpose of the report finds expression in the draft resolution, with its references to Turkey's gross domestic product, the high level of trade with the European Union and the anti-grass roots, liberal, economic reforms to accelerate privatisation and strengthen the bases of a free market economy which the Turkish Grand National Assembly has passed at the request of the International Monetary Fund.
The enthusiasm with which the resolution welcomes Turkey's intention to commit military capabilities under the common security and defence policy is in keeping with the general tone of the report.
In other words, we are talking about increasing the degree to which Turkey is subject to the economic, political and military objectives of big business in the European Union.
We have not, of course, overlooked the positive references in the resolution, such as the reference to human rights, despite the fact that it mistakes manipulation of the status quo for progress and ignores the 10,000-15,000 political prisoners.
There are also positive references to Cyprus, with the call for the occupying forces to be withdrawn, to the need to implement the decisions of the European court, as in the Loïzidou case, to the need for a political solution to the Kurdish question and to the bombings in Iraq.
But we are afraid that, yet again, they are no more than a wish list.
Why is none of this included in the European Commission's report?
For us, the basic issue is this: despite numerous allegations to the contrary, not only has Turkey failed to improve the standard of living of its people, in certain sectors it has made it worse since customs union in 1995 and the declaration of candidate status in 1999.
There can be no doubt that the accession process and accession itself will reduce their quality of life, especially in the economic and social sectors.
There can likewise be no doubt that any funding which it receives will be used to strengthen its oppressive instruments and encourage the regime to continue with its present policy.
Besides, we fail to recognise the sovereign circles of the European Union as defenders of human rights.
Their actions to date have proven the contrary, which is precisely why our feelings of solidarity with the people of Turkey force us to oppose its accession and, by extension, the reports which advocate it.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Commissioner, as several Members of this Parliament have pointed out today, the path to Turkey' s accession to the European Union will be long and hard.
A number of speakers have expressed their concerns regarding the human rights situation and the treatment of minorities, particularly the Kurdish question, the heavy involvement of the military in political life, the legal system and capital punishment, all of which are very serious issues.
We can but share these concerns, which were duly expressed by the Commission in its last annual report.
At the same time, however, I feel we must not paint the situation blacker than it actually is.
Progress has been made and encouraging signs can be seen.
The Turkish Government has announced a whole raft of reforms. President Sezer has made a personal commitment to the process of modernisation in his country.
I therefore think we must encourage the Turkish authorities to forge ahead in order to achieve the necessary compliance with the Copenhagen political criteria.
At the same time, we must continue to be vigilant with regard to the actual implementation of the measures that have been announced.
This, it seems to me, is precisely the balance advocated by Mr Morillon' s report.
The strategy adopted in Helsinki last December marked a turning point in relations between the European Union and Turkey.
It is within this balanced framework that we shall have to resolutely continue our work to promote rapprochement between the European Union and Turkey.
So, in conclusion, let me say: let us be demanding, let us be vigilant, let us set our terms but, let us not be excessive in our demands, as we too must live up to our commitments and the European Union made an important decision in Helsinki.
Mr President, I should like to close the debate by pointing out that there is, of course, a link between the Commission report on the progress that has been made, or not made, in Turkey and the accession partnership.
Several speakers have criticised the fact that the Commission failed to address certain problems.
I can only assume that these speakers have not read the report, because all the problems referred to here, which the Commission allegedly failed to address, are dealt with in the report.
Nor is it correct to say that the Kurdish problem was not called by its name.
Where the report talks about the Kurdish language, Kurdish culture, Kurdish settlements, Kurdish parties, it calls them Kurdish.
Anyone who says that the concept or the word "Kurdish" does not occur has obviously not read the report.
I must defend myself against the impression created here that the terminology of the 2000 report differs from that of the 1999 report.
It does not.
What is new is the accession partnership, and the accession partnership contains a very important stipulation: that the candidate country must deal with all the issues addressed in the progress report.
In other words there is an internal link here.
The accession partnership per se is a very balanced document, based largely on the Helsinki conclusions.
Allow me to correct the erroneous impression, which one or two speakers are clearly under, that it is already a fact of life.
We are at the proposal stage and I am not in a position this afternoon to tell you if this project will get beyond the proposal stage, especially if Parliament endorses proposals made here this morning and this afternoon.
It is not my place to give Parliament advice or to criticise - nor shall I do so.
My place is simply to point out any consequences which the decision may have.
If you deal with the Armenian question in connection with the EU report - please read my lips: the Armenian question in connection with accession to the EU, then the project which we have discussed today will simply never get off the ground.
If the Helsinki conclusions on resolving the Cyprus question are changed along the lines called for by some speakers in the House, i.e. that accession should depend upon resolving the Cyprus question, the project will again founder.
We changed precisely this last year with the backing of a large majority in the European Parliament.
We have said in the past that it is not a condition and all we can demand of Turkey is for it to do its best, in all earnestness, to find a solution.
However, we must never forget that it will take two sides to resolve this issue, not just one.
That is why you cannot demand more of Turkey than serious, constructive, credible effort and you can only demand that a solution be found by those who have made resolving the problem their overall objective.
Finally, I feel that I should again point out that we made Turkey an offer with the Helsinki strategy.
What we now need is to take the first step of the Helsinki strategy and I think it is unfair to evaluate this strategy as if it had already failed, even though the first step has yet to be taken.
What we need now is to take the first step and it is your responsibility, as members of the European Parliament, to decide whether or not we can do so.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Euro-Mediterranean conferences in Marseilles
The next item is the oral questions to the Council (B5-0551/2000) and to the Commission (B5-0552/2000) by Mr Brok, on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy on the Euro-Mediterranean conferences in Marseilles in November 2000.
The author of the questions - Mr Brok - would normally take the floor first, but he is in a meeting with the President and is on his way.
As we are so short of time, would Mr Moscovici mind replying to the question before it is formally put, because he knows the content of the question?
. (FR) Mr President, Commissioners, ladies and gentlemen, I shall have to give my answer before Mr Brok returns from his meeting with the President because I myself will presently have to attend a meeting with the President.
We are obliged to do this because of a very heavy schedule.
I should like to thank Mr Brok for allowing me to give an assessment of the current state of the European Union' s Mediterranean policy since this is, as you know, the eve of the Fourth Conference of Foreign Ministers from the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership, which is to be held in Marseilles.
You will be aware of the importance the French Presidency attaches to enhancing the Mediterranean aspect of the European Union' s external relations. Indeed it has made this one of the priorities of its term in office.
It is, moreover, the reason for our insistence on drawing up an assessment of the results of the first five years of implementation of the Barcelona process, in order to be in a position, in Marseilles, to establish the necessary guidelines.
Commissioner Patten, whom I must welcome, expressed some interesting avenues for investigation in this respect in his communication on reinvigorating the Barcelona process.
Mr Brok referred to the common strategy on the Mediterranean Region, adopted in Feira in June.
This was an important and useful contribution. This, however, unlike the Euro-Mediterranean partnership, which unites the Fifteen Member States with twelve partners on the southern coast of the Mediterranean, is an instrument for discipline within the Union, to some extent, designed to intensify the coherence and coordination of all Community instruments and Member State policies with regard to the Mediterranean region.
Priorities for the implementation of this common strategy have already been established by the Presidency and were presented to the Council of Ministers in September.
The Presidency strove particularly to identify areas on which the European Union and its partners of the southern Mediterranean should concentrate their efforts in order to reinvigorate the Barcelona Process, particularly by intensifying political and economic dialogue, improving the effectiveness of Community aid, the implementation of sub-regional cooperation and South-South integration, and even intensifying initiatives in the field of justice and home affairs.
This is indeed also our objective for the Marseilles Conference.
In the course of the two days of the meeting, the Presidency aims to succeed in giving a new impetus to the process, with everyone on board.
There is probably no need for me to outline in detail the political background of this conference, but I very sincerely believe that the current problems in the Middle East make this Euro-Mediterranean dialogue more essential than ever.
The fact that the situation in the Middle East is difficult at present is not, therefore, a reason to lower our ambitions for the Marseilles conference.
I am not, of course, saying that the current situation will have no impact on our meeting.
I am thinking in particular of the Charter for Peace and Stability, which was discussed at great length among the 27 partners, but whose adoption probably calls for a regional environment where peace has been established.
Mr Brok, who has now rejoined us, asked questions specifically about the delays noted in negotiations.
Should we really use the term 'delay' ?
It is true that discussions have been lengthy and occasionally delicate, but I would say that this is understandable, considering the political context in the Middle East.
The main thing, in my view, is that work is going forward and that the project is not being abandoned.
In this respect, I believe that the 27 partners are resolved to adopt this text as soon as circumstances permit.
Let us not forget that the Barcelona Process is a recent development, only five years old.
Indeed, when we instigated the partnership in 1995, we were aware that we were undertaking a long-term project.
There was plainly nothing easy about the task of bringing together, overnight, 27 partners as diverse as this against an often tense, and occasionally more than tense political background and within a framework as original as the Barcelona arrangement.
Yet, we have managed to maintain dialogue even on occasionally sensitive subjects: stability, terrorism, emigration and human rights, for example.
You may rest assured that we fully intend to continue in this way.
Cooperation in the field of politics and security, known as the 'first aspect' of the Barcelona process is essential, even though we know it is the most sensitive and the longest to implement.
There are also, however, the other 'aspects' of Barcelona, the economic and financial aspect on the one hand, and the social, cultural and human aspect on the other.
This, indeed, leads me to highlight a fundamental principle of the European Union' s Mediterranean policy, and I shall thereby be giving a direct answer to Mr Brok' s question.
I would like to raise the subject of the overall approach of the process of the parallel, balanced development of these three aspects, which underpins the spirit and originality of Barcelona, something we must preserve.
And even if it is true that the economic aspect of Barcelona is the one that, despite the delays, is working best, the main thing is that we must not lose sight of this overall approach, without which the process would be consigned to being nothing more than just another free trade area, lacking in political or human vision in the long term and this would be unfortunate.
Our Mediterranean partners are our direct neighbours. We have a great deal in common with them, a shared heritage, culture, trade and interests.
Finally, as Mr Brok emphasised, we have common challenges, which we must meet together in order to deal with racism, intolerance and xenophobia.
Great prospects are opening up, too, for cooperation in the areas of combating trafficking of all sorts, migration and enhancing the rule of law.
We Europeans have experience that we can profitably share.
It is furthermore in our own interests to support our partners in their process of structural reforms, upgrading and opening up their economies to competition.
In Marseilles, therefore, this new impetus we wish to give the process must be based on all its political and economic components which are, let me reiterate, complementary and inextricably interlinked.
It is true that the Barcelona process and the partnership are ambitious projects requiring resources appropriate to the allotted objectives.
Mr Brok mentioned financial resources.
They are, of course, never sufficient.
The challenges are such, the needs of the southern countries are so great that the resources of the European Union will always appear to be inadequate, especially since the external commitments of the Union have increased to an extraordinary degree in the last few years.
This is a debate which, as you know, we have had several times in the Council; a debate which I think I can say lies at the heart of the reform undertaken on the initiative of Commissioner Patten.
The fact remains that the Council, particularly since 1995, has striven to allocate more extensive resources to the Mediterranean region, appropriate to the challenges of the partnership.
Since 1995 the French Presidency has made particular efforts in this regard, especially at the European Council in Cannes, where we succeeded in restoring balance between the funding for Mediterranean policy and that properly allocated to the countries of Central and Eastern Europe.
This is the spirit in which the MEDA I programme was launched with EUR 3.4 billion committed between 1995 and 1999.
The multiannual total must now be established for the period 2000-2006, and I can only hope - although I cannot put a figure on it at this stage - that it will match up to the ambitions of the European Union in its Mediterranean policy.
You are aware that we are attempting at this very moment to reach an agreement between the fifteen Member States, if necessary by holding an Extraordinary Council meeting tomorrow in Marseilles.
We have already managed to agree on the arrangements for the MEDA II financial regulation.
I feel that the instrument we shall have in future will be more effective, more speedy, more transparent and therefore, ultimately, more credible.
The programme' s administration will be simplified, and the rate of reimbursement and payment will be accelerated.
Furthermore, there are still the EIB loans, which are essential to the development of our partner countries, particularly its major infrastructure projects.
I feel that with an allocation of several billion euros for the Mediterranean region over the period 2000-2007, we shall be in a position to fulfil the expectations of our partner countries in the South over the next few years, and that is crucial.
Today, on the eve of Marseilles, the French Presidency naturally wishes to see the European Union' s Mediterranean priority confirmed, including in financial terms.
In fact, it is no longer just a matter, as it was in 1995, of restoring balance with Eastern Europe, but also of making ready for the future enlargement of the European Union.
Let us not forget that Barcelona, like the rest of the European Union' s external relations, forms an integral part of the acquis communautaire and that therefore the candidate countries should make preparations for seeing the Mediterranean countries as privileged partners, since they are the privileged partners of this Europe of ours.
This is a major challenge for the Europe of the future, whose centre of gravity will, indeed, be shifting towards the East of the continent, but this need not happen at the expense of relations with the South.
In our opinion, this is one more reason to emphasise the Mediterranean dimension of a European Union that wishes to be an actor on the world stage and for which the Mediterranean region must and shall continue to be the 'uniting sea' or in Latin the 'mare nostrum' .
Mr President, it is a sign of the President-in-Office's competence that he has answered questions which I have not even asked.
I should like expressly to thank the French Presidency of the Council for endeavouring to give the necessary momentum to the Barcelona process.
This is a hugely important issue and I say that as someone who comes from central Europe.
We in central Europe must understand that the debate on the Barcelona process is in our common interest, just as we expect southern Europeans to understand that enlargement to central and eastern Europe is in our common interest.
If we look at it from this point of view and take account of all this, then we will be on the right and a reasonable path.
What we are trying to do is to enlarge the European Union on one side and foster good neighbourly relations on the other.
Both are in our common interest and the European Union is prepared to put its hand in its pocket for both.
Of course, we will have to raise the question of how we are to continue funding the overall process, given the current financial perspectives and taking account of our policy in the Balkans, because there has been doubt for some time as to whether we will be able to last the course.
Naturally, we hope that Mr Patten's concept will succeed and that the Commission will be able to implement these projects more quickly than has been the case in the past.
It is of paramount importance that we understand the advantages of the Barcelona process, i.e. that, with our help, it will trigger the economic and social development needed in these countries, giving prospects to the people living in these regions.
It also has something to do with preventing emigration.
In the long run, social need should no longer be a reason - as in the European Union - to emigrate from anywhere in the Mediterranean and the desire to emigrate should be motivated by other considerations.
I think we should help to bring this about.
With proper economic and social prospects in place, there is a good chance of implementing human rights and democratising the community of states in the region.
All this is obviously immensely important to us from the point of view of security policy.
In other words, this is not just a chance for more trade and commerce, it is security policy par excellence and this is the message which we need to get across to our citizens if this process is to gain acceptance.
Xenophobia and national and other forms of terrorism come under this heading and I hope that we shall have a chance to straighten things out here too.
The worrying developments which we have witnessed in many states in North Africa in the past and, in fact, are still witnessing today, also come under this heading and I hope that we shall manage to bring all the countries of North Africa on board in this process without any whys and wherefores.
The current situation in the Middle East is making abundantly clear what measures are needed in the form of joint policies and cooperation.
I should like to take this opportunity of expressing my hope that neither of the two parties to the present conflict in the Middle East will take any unilateral action this week which might make a return to the negotiating table nigh impossible in coming weeks.
We should try and help to give the people of Palestine the chance to decide their own fate, forge their own future and build their own state on the basis of agreement with and the security of the state of Israel.
I trust that the European Union will prepare in Marseilles to push the Mediterranean process forward and that we will be able once again to take joint responsibility for what Mr Moscovici rightly called the mare nostrum.
The Mediterranean is the mare nostrum; the three great monotheistic religions, two of which are now involved in conflict, developed along its shores.
We must get back round the table on this very fundamental basis.
I think that the European Union has a special role to play here and that the countries and the people in these regions are waiting for the European Union to exert its political influence because it can bring balance and credibility to bear there.
I trust that the fact that this political influence is expected and we are expected to play a part there will help to get things moving in Marseilles and provide the necessary credibility, allowing us to make a contribution to peace in this region and enhance our own stability.
Mr President, there is as you know a saying in English that when the star does not appear in a show it is rather like a performance of Hamlet without the first grave digger.
In the temporary, but wholly understandable, absence of my honourable friend at the beginning of this debate I was tempted to say that this would be like Hamlet without the prince, but I am delighted that he is with us in order to contribute his wisdom and good sense to this extremely important debate which is taking place at the honourable Member's initiative.
As the Minister said a moment ago, the Euro-Mediterranean Conference in Marseilles this week takes place against the background of the persisting crisis in the Middle East peace process.
We had all hoped that the circumstances would be a great deal better, and they almost were a great deal better.
Many of us were delighted, even surprised, by the extent of the progress which seemed to have been made this summer at Camp David and we gave a great deal of applause to President Clinton and his administration for all they had done to move things forward.
We came so close, which makes the difficulties, the tragedy of recent weeks, all the more sad.
With the agency reports this morning and this afternoon the news continues to be grim.
The current difficulties should encourage us to redouble our efforts to promote cooperation in the Euro-Mediterranean framework.
Nobody would seek to deny that the Barcelona process and the Middle East peace process are interconnected.
The breakthrough in Euro-Mediterranean relations at Barcelona was made possible partly by the breakthrough at Madrid and then the Oslo Accords.
It is also true that setbacks in the pre-peace process have slowed down the progress of Barcelona.
That is a fact that, alas, we have to live with.
But we should not forget that the Barcelona process has progressed over five years. This has happened despite all the difficulties in the Middle East.
One thing is abundantly plain.
We must not allow the Barcelona process to become a hostage to the Middle East peace process.
Barcelona has its own momentum.
It has its own objectives which remain wholly valid.
We all have an interest in demonstrating both resilience and ambition in Marseilles this week.
The Commission has been encouraged by the generally positive reaction to the proposals that we set out on reinvigorating the Barcelona process, both in the European Union and among the Mediterranean partners.
Perhaps I can just touch on some of the main elements in the strategic approach we have suggested that I hope will meet some agreement at Marseilles.
Firstly, speeding up negotiation and ratification of the association agreements.
First of all with Egypt but also Algeria, Syria and Lebanon.
We in fact completed our negotiations with Egypt almost 18 months ago and I wish that we could now rapidly proceed to initialling the agreement and then in due course to full signature.
I would also like to see us commencing more serious negotiations on association agreements with the other countries.
We put forward the argument that we should tackle the sensitive issue of agricultural trade.
We should review, in our judgment, what needs to be done to ensure that the agreements are fully WTO compatible by the end of the transitional period.
We argue for enhancing south-south trade by encouraging the signature of free trade agreements between the partners.
In this context the Commission undertakes to provide technical assistance on crucial items such as rules of origin and customs matters.
We want to see the bringing together of policies on single market issues and agreement to introduce cumulation of origin side-by-side with the sub-regional free trade arrangements for all partners entering into free trade with each other and adopting the harmonised protocol on rules of origin.
We also want to see an increase in the attractiveness of the region to investors.
In addition to economic reforms, the newly created networks of cooperation among investment promotion agencies and among employers' federations will help, as should the introduction of a new regional risk capital facility.
Reaching agreement on a new regional programme on justice and home affairs covering migration in the widest sense, the fight against organised crime and cooperation on judicial matters is another subject on which we hope we can have a good exchange of views.
Then there is the issue which I know we had many opportunities of debating in this Chamber: that of improving the delivery of MEDA.
The revision of the MEDA regulation and the reform already announced of the Commission's external aid system will help to achieve this and will also lead to more human resources being available.
By decentralising the delivery of aid, we shall involve partners much more in all stages of policy formulation and implementation.
We all have an interest in ensuring that MEDA is tightly focused on the right objectives.
We intend to do that through a close dialogue with partners at all stages.
But there is no escaping the fact that the partners who have faced up to the challenges inherent in the association process are the ones who should get most support.
As far as human rights are concerned, we propose a structural approach looking at the performance of countries over time.
But here again we should be frank.
A country which has serious doubts raised about its record on human rights, democracy and the rule of law and is not prepared to discuss these matters transparently will not find it easy to fit into the new world pattern and it will be less likely to prosper in the longer term.
I just want to say one more thing about MEDA and the reform of our external aid which is relevant to debates which Members are having elsewhere.
In order to ensure that we deliver more rapidly in the Mediterranean and elsewhere in the world, we need - as Members accept rationally and intellectually - more resources to actually manage our programmes and the Commission has put forward what are sensible proposals for doing that.
There are some Members who think that we should put those extra resources into the reserve until we have accomplished certain other objectives.
I say to Members of Parliament, in all good faith, that there comes a moment when you have to trust us and when you have to let us try to do the job, because we cannot conceivably implement our plans more effectively if the people we need to manage them are not made amiable until we have actually demonstrated that we can manage things more effectively.
It is a crazy situation to put us in so I beg all honourable Members who have any influence on these matters to recognise that, if we are to be serious about the reform process, then you have to give us the opportunity to demonstrate whether we can be as good as our word or not.
If we cannot we will have to take the consequences, and the Commissioner for External Affairs will have to take the consequences in due course, but do not put us in a position in which the ends are willed but you do not give us the means until after we have demonstrated that we can achieve the ends.
It makes no sort of sense whatsoever.
It is an issue which is extremely important to all the Mediterranean countries and I hope I will be able to assure them this week that it is our firm intention to do a great deal better in the delivery of our programmes in future.
I hope that all the Ministers who gather in Marseilles will recognise the need to agree on this set of realistic proposals to reinvigorate the Barcelona process precisely now that the Middle East is suffering serious difficulties.
I will be glad to inform Parliament about the results of the Marseilles meeting at the earliest possible opportunity.
We have committed in the past huge resources to this partnership.
We have not managed them as well as we should have done but we have committed huge resources and that reflects the priority which Parliament, the Commission and the Council give to strengthening the partnership around our "middle sea".
In the next few years the success of that partnership will be even more important than ever and I hope that, at Marseilles this week and in subsequent weeks, we manage to ensure that this whole enterprise has even more impulse and energy in it than it has had in the past.
Mr President, five years on from the Barcelona Conference, it is time to take stock of the situation.
Last March, the European Parliament approved a resolution which made a critical analysis of the policies and instruments of the Partnership, proposing some substantial changes.
In June 2000, the Feira Council adopted a common Mediterranean strategy and, after proposing and obtaining endorsement for reform of the Meda regulation, the Commission recently tabled a document on reinvigorating the Barcelona Process.
All this shows that we are aware of how inadequate the results achieved thus far have been, although I feel that the responses are not yet sufficient to deal with the situation, even though it is true that five years are certainly not a very long time over which to judge such complex processes.
Nevertheless, the process which commenced in Barcelona, based on three pillars - political, economic and cultural - was subject to three constraints, now generally well recognised, and Commissioner Patten touched upon them in his speech.
The first concerned the preference shown for free trade, which is linked to the process of economic and commercial liberalisation in terms of codevelopment, economic integration, social policies, cultural dialogue and the training and enhancement of human resources.
The second constraint concerned the type of relationship there should be between the European Union and the Mediterranean partner countries.
In fact, we observe that the still-prevailing bilateral dimension, which is anything but easy to negotiate and takes a long time to ratify, is in danger of increasingly shaping the economies of these countries on the basis of their trade with the Union, hampering the development of the south-south dimension, especially because of the partner countries' difficulty in establishing mutual cooperative relations.
The third constraint concerns the regrettable involvement of the European and Mediterranean civil societies in this process, which is still too dominated by centralism and the almost exclusive role of the governments.
I have stressed these aspects because they contain the key to reinvigorating the Process, and the enhancement of the Barcelona political agenda must be added to all this.
It is, in fact, inconceivable that the agricultural policy, the control of migration flows and the debt should not be at the centre of the Euro-Mediterranean project now.
As regards agriculture, I would like to point out that Parliament has undertaken to organise a conference next spring.
Moreover, the tragic interruption of the Middle East Peace Process is changing the situation in the region.
Unfortunately, the European Union had based its entire policy upon the success of the Oslo Accords.
In fact, the Council's common strategy followed this line.
On the other hand, the Euro-Mediterranean Ministerial Conference, which is to open tomorrow in Marseilles, is set against the backdrop of a tragic situation which will make Europe's role in the region even more sensitive and lead the Union to assume a more substantial political role in the Israel-Palestine conflict.
The fact that, despite this situation, the 27 partners have confirmed their willingness to meet in Marseilles, at least for the moment, is already in itself an indication that all is not lost, although I agree entirely with Commissioner Patten that the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership policy must not become a hostage to the peace process.
In fact, I will go further and say that, in the past, the peace process has served as an excuse for both Europe and for the Mediterranean partners not to be more courageous.
This is why I feel that the debate taking place today could serve to make us aware that this policy is of key importance for the entire Union.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, we would firstly like to congratulate our colleague Mr Brok on his initiative in promoting this debate before the meeting in Marseilles begins.
As Commissioner Patten indicated, it is clear that the lack of consolidated peace in the Middle East is distorting the whole process that was outlined at the Euro-Mediterranean Conference and, in particular, the appropriate and correct application of the MEDA funds.
The Group of the Europe Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party obviously supports the Commission' s actions in favour of a Mediterranean policy, as outlined five years ago in Barcelona, and we want it to be consolidated.
A few days ago, in Barcelona, at various meetings of the Círculo de Economía, the Secretary General of the Council, Mr Solana, told us that the priorities for European external activity are firstly with our neighbours, and our closest neighbours are the Mediterraneans.
And we are not forgetting that the source of potential conflicts that we have in the medium term, due to demographic change, inequality of income, changing expectations and cultural differences, is also there.
Our priority must therefore be to ensure the peace and security of the European Union in the Mediterranean and we have to make every possible effort to achieve this cooperation and to ensure that the funds allocated are used efficiently, according to what we might call the selfish generosity of the European Union.
We have to be generous towards the Mediterranean, but from a selfish point of view, which is to safeguard the stability that we need so much for the people of the European Union, and for European society.
Mr President, we presented the MEDA report at the beginning of September, and while this report, admittedly, allowed us to note some shortcomings, it was also, more importantly, an opportunity to proclaim loud and clear the determination of both this House and the Commission in Euro-Mediterranean matters.
Commissioner Patten, I read your article in today' s issue of Le Monde.
I concur completely with it. What Mr Moscovici has just said is precisely what you stated yourself.
The fact, moreover, that we carried the motion in this House, with the enormous majority of 502 votes in favour and a paltry 17 against, shows that we are all unanimously in favour of renewing and boosting the Euro-Mediterranean Process.
There are a number of points I would like to clarify, now that the Marseilles Conference is about to take place, in order to ensure that we get some answers, as it is not enough to repeat ritualistic phrases, given that we are all in agreement.
We also need to take practical action and to get specific answers.
Indeed, on Thursday evening, I assessed the situation with Mr Josselin, the French Minister responsible for these matters, and I know that the French Presidency is wholeheartedly behind the idea of promoting the process as we see it.
I should like, first of all, to discuss the budget.
Where do matters stand in this respect?
We have been told that roughly EUR 8 billion have been earmarked for the period 2000-2006, but this amount seems to fluctuate.
So what, in the end, is the budget for 2001?
It seems that at least EUR 1 billion is needed annually, but for the moment this sum has not been allocated, and at the same time there is talk of EUR 200 million to be taken, supposedly, from the margin relating to appropriations for Kosovo and Serbia.
It is far from clear.
We do not need to create competition between all these various needs but to find new resources.
I am in complete agreement with Commission Patten that, in order to do a proper practical job, the appropriations must be made available.
I strenuously urge all my fellow Members to set aside the appropriations needed for us to be able to take action and to be able to consider the projects.
Secondly, I should like to point out that we must give a boost to decentralised cooperation, which seems to be in a bad way.
This is a major concern of local communities and non-governmental organisations. The forum that was held in Marseilles on 12 November made that quite clear.
Next, we must increase the amount of appropriations for regional development in order to encourage relations and trade between regions, but also environmental protection, the fight against terrorism and drugs trafficking, emigration and integration, and to make progress towards human rights, as we have requested.
We would ask what action the Commission intends to take in order to invite proposals for projects, with the involvement of civil society, and in order to process and monitor these projects.
These are the important practical questions I wished to ask, and I should like to thank Mr Brok for allowing us to have this debate just before the Presidency and the Commission are due to discuss these issues.
Mr President, Commissioner, I share the determination which has been expressed to give a new boost to the Euro-Mediterranean partnership forthwith.
Even those behind the Barcelona process consider that it has broken down - that is the description which has been used - and it is a long way from having fulfilled its promises.
In this respect, today' s motion for a resolution falls a long way short of the declared ambition.
The peoples of the South are often critical and are concerned about this failure. I share their impatience, and even their disappointment and their anger, at the delays but also at the inadequacies of this partnership and at the initial damage it has caused.
There are still extreme disparities between the two sides of the Mediterranean, which keep the peoples of the South in an explosive economic and social situation, with poverty and unemployment, particularly among young people.
The path leading to an area of shared prosperity has, for the time being, stopped at the association agreements, which are governed by strictly economic and financial interests in denial of the needs of the people.
These populations, however, are already suffering under the weight of the debt, the drop in the price of raw materials and imposed structural actions.
The free trade area is in danger of considerably intensifying these imbalances, even though there is an urgent need, instead, for greater collaboration in order to meet needs.
I am thinking in particular of public services, more especially in the areas of water, education, health, public transport and housing.
This partnership will have no future unless it has the benefit of close cooperation with the representatives of the citizens concerned, the associations, the NGOs, the trade unions and civil society as a whole.
Moreover, the dream of peace on both sides of the Mediterranean should be listened to and the wish granted at the earliest possible opportunity.
The spiralling violence in the Middle East, the war being waged so violently and resolutely against the Palestinian people, whose right to statehood is still being denied by Israel, are all threatening the future of the entire region.
The European Union must, as the Palestinian leaders expressly request, henceforth take bold action in order to put an end to the gunfire, to promote effective dialogue and actively militate in favour of applying the UN resolutions.
The Marseilles Conference could have been used to this end.
The failure - or, at least, the relative failure - of the Charter for Peace and Stability proves that it is not possible to achieve Europe' s "security" on the basis of marginalising the South and closing borders.
These last few days in Marseilles, I have observed the great numbers of speakers addressing such comments to the Conference of Ministers, speaking in favour of cancelling debt and replacing free trade with relations of mutually supportive codevelopment...
(The President cut the speaker off)
Mr President, the different areas of the Euro-Mediterranean dialogue must, in my opinion, be tackled from the social, political and cultural perspectives, in continuation of that process - the Euro-Mediterranean Conference - which was set in motion in Barcelona in 1995 when we first started to talk about Mediterranean policy, although the complexity of the subject caused some difficulties even then.
The world is moving inexorably towards globalisation and, as a result, is having to organise itself into large blocks which act as protagonists on the great stage of world competition.
This is prompting the Europe of national States to form a single political, economic and commercial entity in order to organise and boost a market of over 350 million consumers and set it on a level with other markets.
To this end, we need to establish suitable structures, which could be both political and economic.
However, first and foremost, we need political strategies which are free of bureaucracy.
Europe is the guardian of great values: peace, freedom and social progress, values which must be protected day in day out precisely because they are the result of victories won at the cost of great sacrifice.
Europe's economic progress is now under threat from the current globalisation process, and our continent is in serious danger of a recession caused by competition from South-East Asia - where the cost of labour is a tenth of the cost of labour in Europe - the USA and Japan.
The Mediterranean policy is now operating in a world of extremely varied interests and latent stabilisation, and it must therefore include certain elements such as the development of peace-keeping initiatives - but it must not, I would stress, be limited to this - and the creation of partnership projects which involve northern and southern Europe, precisely because the objective of making the Mediterranean an area of dialogue, tolerance and cooperation and a guarantee of peace and stability cannot be achieved without firm political will or without the lasting, well-balanced social and economic development of less-favoured peoples and the social development of the coastal peoples, improving their employment possibilities, in order to put an end to the multitude of problems caused by the tremendous number of emigrants leaving the Basin and now affecting all the countries of the Union.
We are therefore convinced that the Union's Mediterranean policy must take account of the Mediterranean Basin and therefore treat the Mediterranean as a project, mindful of the fact that the rights of peoples take priority over the rights of individuals, if only because, when all is said and done, conflicts between nations harm the life and development of the individual citizens.
Braudel's 'Mediterranean of a thousand things' , the ancient civilisations which, for years, have regarded each other with hostility across the Basin, now have the opportunity to start afresh, setting off along a common path which, through political will and the power of dialogue, will lay the foundations for genuine progress and economic and social development.
Mr President, in Nice the European Union will need to strike a balance between integration and enlargement and in Marseilles it will need to strike a balance between its function in central Europe and its responsibility in the Mediterranean.
We need to set priorities; in other words, we need to use the enlargement process to strengthen Europe from the centre outwards and force a stabilisation process in south-east Europe and in the western Balkans, but without neglecting the Barcelona process, which has been drifting for five years now.
We can hypothesise as to whether a decisive, uniform EU policy in the Balkans might have prevented the Balkan war and the European Union might therefore have avoided the consequential costs of the war.
Now, on the eve of Marseilles, we need to ensure that aid is not given to the Balkans at the expense of the MEDA programme or vice versa and that everything stays within the financial framework agreed in Berlin.
With these conditions in place, it should be possible for the special council in Marseilles to reach a consensus which does more than just highlight the fault lines in the EU.
We must ensure that the MEDA aid programme is not delayed by bureaucratic hurdles for which the Commission is to blame and that projects are identified more quickly in future by the Mediterranean countries involved.
It is disappointing to see that the Mediterranean countries only called up just under a quarter of the EUR 4.7 billion budget of the MEDA I programme which expired in 1999.
But this also illustrates that we need to estimate the absorption capacity of the countries bordering the Mediterranean more realistically.
I therefore particularly welcome the Commission plan to speed up the association agreement and I think that the revision of the MEDA regulation was a very good move.
So far, I have deliberately avoided making any link between the Euro-Mediterranean conference and the conflict in the Middle East.
The very fact that this conference is even taking place and that Israel and the Palestinians have agreed to attend and the threat of boycott by the Arab League has come to nothing must qualify as a success.
We can only hope that this conference in Marseilles does not turn into a platform for polemics, pushing the first important signs of a Mediterranean policy in the European Union and the revival of the Barcelona to one side.
Mr President, tomorrow and the following day the Euro-Mediterranean Conference is to be held in Marseilles, attended by all the countries that signed the Barcelona Declaration, and I think that we can congratulate ourselves on this.
It will be a success that will show that the Barcelona process, which began on the back of the Oslo agreements, has reached a sufficient level of maturity and solidity to prevent it from being caught up in the difficulties of the Middle East process.
Moreover, by continuing it can make the best possible contribution, a secondary but significant contribution, to the resumption of dialogue in the Middle East.
However, in all the evaluations that are now being made of five years of the Barcelona process, many people think that we can be satisfied simply that the process is continuing, due to the fact that there have been ministerial meetings attended by representatives from Israel, the Palestinian Authority, Syria and Lebanon, etc.
And this is, perhaps, a sad consolation.
The evaluation is now a contrasting one and, of course, the strategic development of Euro-Mediterranean policy cannot depend on a temporary evaluation.
It is continuity over time that can provide results, and positive results will be ultimately measured by the development of the countries of the southern Mediterranean.
Those countries come up against a great deal of problems finding a place for their development and economic integration in the context of globalisation and we must do everything in our power to help restore balance to a situation characterised by gulfs between North and South.
If current tendencies continue we can be pessimistic about the future.
Today a European is statistically twice as rich as someone from the Maghreb, and in twenty years' time he will be twenty times as rich, if we do not manage to turn the situation around.
In this respect, the proposal that the Commission has made for a new impetus is a positive one, and we fully agree with the two priorities that Mr Patten has set out in his speeches and repeated here this afternoon.
We need to speed up the processes of the association agreements.
Above all, we need to avoid having to make an evaluation of the application of MEDA in five years' time that leads us to conclude that only 26% have been used.
However, this is not enough.
We probably need to open up a more medium-term perspective and I can only list the three areas that I feel are essential in that respect: The first is European projects to structure a regional area in the southern countries. The second is an essential policy dealing with the human aspect of managing migration flows.
The third is discussion and the quest for progress and consensus in developing a common agricultural policy in the Mediterranean, without which we will probably not be able to achieve a positive outcome in the medium term.
Mr President, reinvigorating the Barcelona Process and giving it direction means not just concerning ourselves with the free market and economic and trade concerns but, in effect, relaunching a policy of cooperation and development and defence of human rights throughout the area. It means bringing about the necessary social reforms, focusing on employment, the need to revitalise the economy in the southern countries and the reduction and cancellation of debt as central issues.
It means ensuring that civil society plays a greater role. However, we must not ignore the fact that the Barcelona Process has entered a critical stage, caused not only by lack of impetus or a slow down in the European undertaking in respect of the events in the Balkans or enlargement, but also by the conditions of tragic open conflict in the Mediterranean which are holding back reinvigoration.
The Palestinian question has once again become central.
Commissioner Patten has said that we must not be hostages to the Palestine-Israel situation.
That is true, but we cannot avoid it.
If we do not tackle very soon the issue of the recognition of a Palestinian State, a State which can coexist with Israel, if military occupation of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip does not cease, the issue cannot be resolved.
It must be resolved, first and foremost, of course, in order to put an end to the suffering of the Palestinian people, but also in order to bring more stability to the region.
I hope that when the Conference of Ministers of the Union meets in Marseilles, it will be able to adopt a position on this matter which is coherent with what is always pompously stressed, that human rights must not be violated.
It is essential to reinvigorate the Process and we must do so, but we must do so in the knowledge that we cannot escape the central issue of the Mediterranean.
Mr President, since the Barcelona conference and now on the eve of the Marseilles conference, as has already been said, a great deal has taken place in the Mediterranean region.
It is true that this Conference is going to take place in a context of violence and of a peace crisis as a result of the conflict in the Middle East, but it is also true that holding the conference will enable us to keep the flame of the Euro-Mediterranean process burning and that it should not be contaminated by the tragic conflict.
There are many common problems that are currently affecting the Euro-Mediterranean area: illegal immigration, poverty, foreign debt, human rights, drought and terrorism, which mercilessly destroys the lives of innocent individuals and families, as we are tragically experiencing in Spain, Algeria and the Middle East.
Now more than ever we need to proclaim that only regional cooperation, dialogue with civil society, economic and cultural exchange, solidarity and mutual understanding can make the two shores of the Mediterranean a prosperous and peaceful area.
The Commission and the Council need to urgently undertake what was agreed in Feira and they need to make a common policy for the development of the Mediterranean region viable.
We cannot and must not waste our human resources, our agricultural, industrial or traditional craftsmanship resources which, along with such vital products as oil, gas and new technologies, should be basic tools for the development of a Mediterranean society that is much more balanced, fair and competitive than at present.
Mr President, I will come back to the conflict in the Middle East; not two months ago, the Presidents of the Israeli Parliament and the Palestinian Assembly united in this House with the President of the European Parliament, in a plea for peace and harmony, and we all joined in hearty applause for that gesture.
When weapons replace words, dialogue and understanding, the foundation and substance of democracy that is Parliament fails, and this is also our failure.
It is a warning call to the European Union to play a much more active role in the Mediterranean area, which historically and culturally has enriched our European continent.
It would be an error not to take on the leading role that history requires of us.
In addition, I also think, Commissioner, that the borders that geo-politics demands should serve to prevent the free movement of those who make a way of life out of organised crime, the trafficking of arms, drugs and human beings and particularly terrorism, a way of life that is condemned by all civilised countries.
Let us make borders a real filter for crime and criminals, and not a barrier to development, culture or the prosperity of peoples.
The European Union needs a new culture of immigration and a better management of migration flows.
The European Union is jointly responsible, with the countries of origin, for immigration and for organising those migration flows, which are so necessary for the development of the region.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, every day that passes is punctuated by developments in the current crisis in the Middle East and every day that passes is a further indication, as if this were needed, that everything that happens in the South and around the Mediterranean is of direct concern to us, and affects our daily lives.
When things go well in the South, peace is possible, democratic progress can be achieved, there is more economic development and less illegal emigration.
In short, there is hope.
When things go badly in the South, we have war, violence, fundamentalism - and this also affects the areas in Europe in which we live - not to mention the risk of a new oil crisis.
Today, once again, we face the worst possible scenario. This is quite clear from looking at current events.
Some of us have been saying all this time and time again for many years in this House.
Unfortunately, for many years, too, factors such as the enlargement of Europe to the East, the Balkans crisis and wars have displaced the South in the minds of a great many Europeans, hence the repeated delays in Mediterranean processes and policies.
We have seen cuts in appropriations and problems in harnessing these appropriations.
The general negotiations are bogged down; there are delays in the negotiations for association agreements and even greater delays in ratification procedures.
This creates the most serious disappointment in our partners in the South and our political influence, that of Europe, has suffered as a result, even though we continue to be, in spite of everything, the foremost financial backers of the South.
We must therefore, as several of us have said this afternoon, immediately tighten up our political objectives with regard to the South, support the appropriations that have been committed, expedite the association agreements with the partner countries, make the Charter for Peace and Stability a priority once again, make great efforts to assist development and do something about the burden of debt of the poorest countries.
At long last we must open up our markets to their produce, and standardise our regulations for the reception and asylum of persons immigrating into Europe.
To sum up, we must restore Europe' s confidence in its determination to achieve a real partnership with the South.
Everyone is aware of this. We must make a quantitative, but also a qualitative effort.
The Commission and the Council claim to want this.
We are willing to believe them, but the countries of the South need more than just promises and speeches, and it is up to us to give them those things.
No doubt, Marseilles is our last chance for that.
This is one of the major issues of the French Presidency.
Mr President, the Marseilles Summit is intended to be a step further towards creating a free trade area, a sort of single market promoting membership of the WTO, as you describe it so well, Mr Patten, in today' s issue of Le Monde.
It is the economic pillar which is brought to the fore.
In this instance, as at the EU-Asia Summit meeting, ASEM III, in Seoul a month ago, the European Union is once again seeking to export its own economic model and its capital.
Marseilles too, the other summit, brought together the members of associations, trade unions and political bodies from all around the Mediterranean, and these people were together attempting resolutely to find solutions to meeting the needs of their peoples.
As far as I am concerned, this necessarily involves using new means, and hence cancelling debt.
What is much more serious, however, at the very moment when we are calmly exchanging points of view, often very divergent ones, within this Chamber, more and more Palestinians are being killed.
The European Union must, as a matter of urgency, strongly condemn the Israeli attacks on the Palestinian people, whose demand to live in peace in their own state is a legitimate one and one which must, therefore, be met.
Mr President, Europe is sometimes in a great hurry, and sometimes being in a hurry makes you leave things behind.
And I have seen that in all these documents on strengthening the Barcelona agreement we are forgetting some things.
One of them is that liberalisation, a single market, cannot be established without taking care of some important aspects, such as people and culture or education.
If we liberalise the markets and encourage a drive to integrate them while forgetting this, we run the risk of ultimately achieving colonisation rather than cooperation.
Europe needs to think outside the principle of subsidiarity or go beyond it and realise that it needs to provide a great deal of aid in order to raise the level in the recipient countries, among both men and women, not only of basic education but also of minimum education, which in Europe is considered to be for all citizens.
Therefore, we cannot just talk about products and the organisation of markets without thinking about those citizens.
Secondly, I think that we are also forgetting another important subject, which is the environment.
Europe has not produced any policies on desertification or on water that benefit the Mediterranean countries and we need to think about a Mediterranean environment policy that understands the location, the systems and also the climatic diversity of the Mediterranean.
Policy as it is set out today could not be transferred to many countries of the southern Mediterranean.
In this respect, we need to take into account that in Europe there is serious pressure from citizens of the north on the southern Mediterranean, through tourism.
With the rise in crude oil prices there is going to be much more pressure on the Mediterranean.
This translates into the consumption of the land, and a policy of environmental dumping, which is absolutely unacceptable.
Also, we cannot demand that European citizens properly implement their environmental policy and not apply this to other countries.
I have received a motion for a resolution, pursuant to Rule 42(5) of the Rules of Procedure, to close the debate.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow, Wednesday, at 11.30 a.m.
Aid for reconstruction
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports:
A5-0324/2000 by Mr Lagendijk, on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy, on the amended proposal for a Council Regulation concerning the European Agency for Reconstruction [COM(2000) 628 - C5-0526/2000 - 2000/0112(CNS)]
A5-0330/2000 by Mr Westendorp y Cabeza, on behalf of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, on the amended proposal for a Council regulation on assistance for Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and amending Regulation (EEC) No 3906/89, Decision 97/256/EC and Regulation (EEC) No 1360/90 [COM(2000) 628 - C5-0525/2000 - 2000/0111(CNS)]
Mr President, Commissioner, it has taken the Commission a while to produce a final proposal on the delivery of aid to the western Balkans.
As is known, a proposal was submitted back in May but we had to wait until September before there was a definitive proposal on the table.
This had to do with the discussion within the Commission on the need to find an alternative way of delivering external aid.
In other words, the proposal now on the table reflects this discussion, and as I see it, is also a first example of how we should do things in the future.
This also means that the Commission' s new proposal was worth waiting for, because it sets out in clear and lucid terms how the European Commission proposes to deliver aid in future, both with regard to the general regulation for the Balkans and with regard to the proposal for the agency in Kosovo.
To put it in a slightly grand way, perhaps it can also be deemed a kind of fresh start for the delivery of aid, based on the extraordinarily negative experiences we had in Bosnia, but also on our positive experiences in Kosovo.
There is now a regulation on the table which, as I see it, equips the European Union to deliver aid in an efficient manner and on time, and to put EU funds to good use in the countries of the western Balkans.
In this way, and this is very important - I will come back to it again shortly - a good balance has been struck between the Commission' s responsibility on the one hand and the need to involve the Member States in some way, on the other.
It is a balance which, in my opinion, and I think also in the Commission' s view, could not always be found in the past, because all too often the Member States tried to get in on the act when it came to delivering aid.
The proposals now on the table have been far more successful in striking this balance.
Naturally, and I am coming now to the reports compiled by myself and by Mr Westendorp, there is room for improvement.
Anyone who sees and reads the proposed reports will see that a number of improvements have been proposed to certain sections.
For example, explicit attention is to be given to the construction of the civilian society, support for the media, and the important role fulfilled by education.
I happened to be at a conference in Zagreb last week, when once again it became evident how important it is not to teach future generations of mini Balkans citizens - as it were - old stereotypes, or inculcate them with notions of 'the enemy' , and instead, to made a fresh start in this respect.
I think it is important for the regulation to establish that the Commission will continue to spend money on this kind of project in the future, as it does now.
However, there are two key aspects of policy I would like to focus on.
The first relates - and I am sorry to have to bother the Commissioner with this again - to the finances.
To be perfectly honest, if we manage to deliver a sound opinion on this regulation, today and tomorrow, then we will have completed one part of our work; the first half I would say.
Then we will have it down on paper how things are supposed to be done in future.
However, if, when it comes to December, we do not include the funds required to implement the regulation then all we are doing today is building castles in the air.
This is not a reproach directed at the Commission.
The Commission has been in a position to see that I am expressly calling for the assessment of the costs carried out by the Commission - the famous EUR 5.5 billion for the next seven years - to be explicitly included in this regulation, otherwise, to be blunt about it, what we are doing is pure hypocrisy.
We cannot adopt a regulation here in Parliament knowing full well that the funds required to implement it will not be available.
That is why this is stage one of the battle for an effective system of delivering aid to the Balkans.
Stage two will take place in December when our colleagues in the Committee on Budgets, but ultimately Parliament as a whole, will have to opt for a sound financial basis for this regulation.
That being the case, it is a shame that Mr Moscovici is absent at present, because as I see it, responsibility on that point falls specifically to the Council, and to the Member States, who must be prepared to recognise that what we, and what they, want to achieve through this regulation costs money, and that this money must be found in the European Union' s budget.
The second point, the general point about delivering aid, concerns the balance that must be struck - hence the need for an amendment on this point - between the need for the European Union to maintain a high profile in the Balkans, on the one hand, and the need to support smaller projects as well, on the other.
The fact of the matter is - and anyone who has been to the Balkans will confirm this - that the United States is extremely good at creating the impression that it is able to do a great deal more with a good deal less money.
The fact that the European Union actually spends far more money but is nothing like as high profile, has led many people to conclude that there is a need to substantially raise people' s awareness of our activities in the Balkans.
I would agree with this analysis.
This almost inevitably means that a great deal of money will go to the large projects, i.e. to road and bridge building projects; to projects that can fly the flag for Europe.
As I said, we need to do this to raise our profile.
But be warned, this must not lead to a situation where, when it comes to drawing up priorities, all kinds of smaller projects, which we have supported hitherto, are sacrificed in the process.
Hence my appeal for this regulation to strike a good balance between high profile activities, i.e. large projects, on the one hand, and continued attention to projects for democracy, on the other, i.e. projects to do with security, projects that are seldom as high profile, but which are all the more necessary to guarantee stability in the Balkans.
Then there is the question of the agency in Kosovo.
Seen in a positive light, I sometimes think, and hope, that the agency, by the manner in which it has operated to date, and in which it is to function in the future, ought to serve as an example of how aid should be delivered to the Balkans, and also to other parts of the world.
I have drawn such positive conclusions from my various visits to the agency because as I see it, despite all - and I repeat, all - the mistakes that are made there, there can be no doubt that they have found a new and effective way to deliver aid.
If we then talk about increasing efficiency, which is the overall objective of this regulation, and relate this to the agency in Kosovo, then we have no choice but to reduce the involvement of the Member States.
In quite concrete terms, this means reducing the influence of the Governing Board associated with the agency.
In the past, we have been highly critical of the way in which the Commission delivers aid, as this is often bound up in red tape.
The procedures involved are often too complex, but we must not turn a blind eye, nor must we want to - and I hope the Member States do not do so either - to their part in this.
All too often the Member States have tried to get in on the act where overseas aid is concerned.
All too often this has led to delays, inefficiency, and the promotion of national interests.
As far as I am concerned, and this is one of the key messages in my report on the agency, the role of the Member States in aid provision will be much reduced in future because there is evidence to show that their involvement causes delays.
Lastly, Mr President and Commissioner, a final point.
Some of my fellow Members are inclined to want to extend the activities of the agency still further than was the case hitherto.
The agency is now based in Kosovo, and the Council has decided - rightly to my mind - to extend its scope to Serbia and Montenegro.
I feel we will have to call it a day at that point because we can draw a lesson from the work that the agency is doing now, i.e. physical reconstruction, with a view to carrying out the same activities to good effect in Serbia and Montenegro.
Delivering aid to the Balkans within the framework of CARDS, to countries such as Croatia, Albania, and Macedonia, demands other special qualities and other capabilities.
I would therefore say: let the agency do what it is good at, i.e. physical reconstruction.
It will prove very difficult to do this as effectively in Serbia.
Let us confine ourselves to this and not dissipate our energies by extending the agency' s capabilities beyond the borders of former Yugoslavia.
Mr President, Commissioner, I am aware that the Balkans are not the most promising area for optimism.
However, I do not believe I am being over-optimistic if I say that the European Union is harvesting the fruits of coordinated and persistent action.
After the tragedy that the Balkans suffered, these fruits first appeared a few months ago in Croatia with free elections and a regime eager to respect human rights, and have now revealed themselves in Belgrade, where the citizens have confirmed their desire to live together in peace and freedom and to take their place in the family of Europe.
We must not disappoint them in their expectations, and now more than ever these countries need our help.
We must continue this process of stabilising the region and prepare them for a longer-term perspective of integration in the institutions of Europe.
In doing this, of course, we are staking our credibility and our own stability.
But if we want to help them, we must do so more effectively and in a more coordinated fashion than we have done so far; otherwise there will occur what Mr Lagendijk has called the loss of visibility of the European Union, which bears the largest financial burden in the Balkans and yet is far less visible than countries like the United States, which can react practically in real time to any need that arises in the country.
So much so that when I was in Bosnia-Herzegovina and visited a village, they would greet me jubilantly with 'It is so good that you Americans are here to help us.'
The European Union' s action had become that invisible.
In the report on aid to the western Balkans that I have drawn up, working in close collaboration with Mr Lagendijk, on the two topics that we are dealing with today - a fine example of cooperation between two committees - we have recognised a number of limitations.
On the one hand there is a geographical limitation, which suggests that the agency' s action should be expanded to embrace not only Kosovo but all Yugoslavia.
We have also found some functional limitations.
First, the international organisations that carry out these operations, such as UNMIK in Kosovo or the office of the High Representative in Sarajevo, also need to benefit from this aid.
In addition, there are several measures - I am referring particularly to the CARDS programme - that should go beyond reconstruction and extend to training, education and the reconstruction of civil society in close collaboration with NGOs.
It is vital that NGOs should collaborate in this field, and also that there should be some coordination among them, if we really want their action to be more effective and to reach all parts of those regions.
We must also highlight the media.
The media in that region have often been responsible for the tragedy they have been through, so it is essential to have a completely free media that acts in accordance with the rules that prevail in our democracies.
It is also very important to make the judiciary really independent.
We have also come across some operational limitations, which are among the causes of the lack of visibility.
Operational limitations in the aid management system.
Sometimes there is too much bureaucracy, too much red tape, and too much vacillation when the aid is granted.
Therefore it is important for the CARDS programme management committee to be a committee that confines itself to the general lines of multiannual planning and does not try to carry out everyday micro-management at too detailed a scale, because otherwise we may again have the same problems as in the past.
It is also important that the work of the CARDS management committee and the work of the Kosovo Reconstruction Agency should not get mixed up, or be duplicated or overlap; instead there should be a perfect division of duties.
It is also essential to strengthen the role of the European Parliament, and I believe that with the amendments, which are likely to be voted for tomorrow, the European Parliament will be able to perform a greater consultative role in a process of interinstitutional collaboration.
Lastly, I want to mention the financial package.
Mr President, you are perfectly aware that nowadays the miracle of the loaves and the fishes is most unlikely to be repeated, and with the precious few loaves and fishes we now have available it is going to be practically impossible for us to tackle all of the European Union' s external obligations.
We have to give more effective and more coordinated aid, gathering together all the scattered bits and pieces.
I conclude by repeating the Commission' s own words - that these two proposals are the cornerstone of a process that should lead these countries, which have had and still have so many problems, to become fully integrated into the structures of Europe.
I am firmly convinced that the Balkans do have a solution and that the Balkan curse can be lifted, but for this they need all our support and these two programmes aim to provide it.
Mr President, I feel that the content of this important measure has been clearly and very well explained by Mr Westendorp y Cabeza.
The Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport, which I have the honour of chairing, has endeavoured, through its opinion, to emphasise the importance of this reconstruction work in the Balkans as a possible way of integrating these areas into Europe as a whole.
At the same time, in order to include a specifically cultural angle, not in abstract or generic terms but in terms of solidarity, we have proposed amendments which have found favour in the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy and which, I feel, contribute to providing, on the one hand, economic, civil, supportive assistance while restoring the civil society of these very unfortunate areas and, on the other, the possibility for cultural and institutional - and I stress the word institutional - support, to give these areas a sense of association with Europe, association in terms of civilisation, in terms of cultural initiatives, as well.
The fact that the amendments expressed as an opinion by the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport have been accepted and that unanimity has been achieved is, in my opinion, an important factor which this House should note and take into consideration.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Commissioner, what you see before you is one happy man, one happy rapporteur, because the Commission has adopted the lion' s share of the amendments put forward by the Committee on Budgetary Control, on their merits.
Of course this is only to be welcomed.
Our work has borne fruit.
But I am also happy because I feel that Parliament has succeeded, by keeping the pressure on, in turning round a situation that originally left a great deal to be desired.
Rapporteur Lagendijk rightly pointed out that, if truth be known, the Commission' s original proposal drew no lessons from the past, from the comments already made by the Court of Auditors, or from the experiences of the European Agency for Reconstruction. Nor did it take on board the comments in Mrs Pack' s report, which was available to us back in 1999, or the feedback from the ad hoc delegation that we sent to Kosovo, and which submitted some very important recommendations under the leadership of Doris Pack and Terry Wynn.
When I drafted my report in July, I saw at once that that this original proposal was lacking.
I then asked the Commission to withdraw the proposal.
I am delighted that they did so and went on to submit a new proposal.
There has been a new proposal on the table since 4 October, and we are working on it now.
I feel this is to be welcomed, thanks to the pressure exerted by Parliament.
What is it about?
We must ensure that the regulations now on the table make provision for EU aid to the Western Balkans to be delivered quickly, flexibly and unbureaucratically, in cooperation with the local population and local bodies.
There has been all too little of this in previous years.
We need a flexible system to this end, a lightweight structure free of red tape.
It is a pity that the President-in-Office of the Council is absent today.
It is mainly the Council and the Member States who have, as it were, put a spoke in this large wheel in recent years.
They have put paid to things that might have been possible.
Therefore I welcome the proposal now on the table.
On behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control, I am able to tell you that we support all the amendments.
Naturally we are also delighted that the amendment regarding OLAF has been adopted.
It is indeed the case that the anti-fraud unit must also be free to carry out its full range of tasks in the Western Balkans.
Finally, I would like to say a brief word, speaking in a personal capacity rather than on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control.
I am currently working on a report on how funds are being spent in Bosnia Herzegovina.
It is a follow-up report to a special report by the Court of Auditors.
We will need to ensure that sufficient funds are earmarked for Bosnia Herzegovina in the CARDs regulation.
Our task will not end there, as we will still have quite some way to go.
It is a fragile and unstable state.
That, more than anything is what we must keep in mind in the years to come.
I am sorry to have to start the group debate without the President of the Council being here with us.
I am promised he will be here soon.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, the Lagendijkand Westendorp reports on the Agency and the CARDS programme - it is difficult to distinguish one from the other - base their proposed amendments on the experience gained from their forerunners, the OBNOVA programme and the Kosovo agency.
I think we all realise that a slimmer, more efficient structure is needed if the good work which the Kosovo Agency has carried out in recent months is to be consolidated for future purposes.
In future, responsibility must be vested in a few people, including a director, if you like, so that really one person is responsible vis-à-vis the committee which selects the individual programmes.
I think responsibility must be vested in very few people if we are to raise the profile of European work on the ground.
As we have seen in Bosnia time and again, the Americans manage to show themselves to good advantage with very limited funds.
In numerous areas, we have spent and continue to spend more money than anyone else but still we are not visible because it sort of runs through our fingers rather than being vested in any one institution.
I also feel that duplicate work by the governing board and management board and unnecessary ritual meetings of their members, where it is the director responsible who needs to take the necessary decisions on time, should be avoided.
I hope that Parliament's proposals will be accepted by the Commission and the Council.
I repeat: unnecessary expenditure on unnecessary meetings really should be cut back.
The money is desperately needed on the ground, where it can be put to better use.
If, although this was not the case with my report on the Kosovo Agency, the Council could perhaps at last learn from its mistakes, that would help the taxpayer no end.
The objectives of the CARDS programme were in fact all right.
But something important, one important objective is missing from this CARDS and that is support for education and training in these countries.
Without education and training there is nothing, which is why I am delighted that the members of all the committees have helped me to table this proposed amendment.
As I understand it, the Commissioner also takes the view that this should be an important objective in the CARDS programme.
It should also be an objective which is close the Council's heart.
I really do hope that the French Minister for Education, Jacques Lang, will be able to persuade his cabinet to ensure that the French government does not oppose the inclusion of the objective of education in the CARDS programme in the next Coreper.
I think it would be counterproductive and I am certain that Mr Lang will do his utmost and if Mr Moscovici were here, he would perhaps do so too.
So my thanks to all my fellow members who see this as an important objective and I am delighted that we shall be able to bring these countries more in the way of content in the future.
Mr President, I wanted to make a number of general comments today about what I would like to call 'the political reconstruction of the Balkans region' .
Mr Swoboda will say a little more, on behalf of my group, about what I would like to call 'efforts to reconstruct the EU' , which is also the subject of the reports under discussion today, courtesy of Mr Lagendijk and Mr Westendorp, to whom I offer my compliments.
In theory, we should be encouraged by the developments that have taken place in the Balkans over the past year.
A great deal of headway has been made in the space of a year and the internal dynamics in a number of countries are at long last enhancing the role of the international community, even though the Kosovo crisis is still fresh in the memory.
Kosovo is, and remains, a problem child.
The local elections had a positive outcome.
Of course it is ever thus when moderates win, but the internal situation remains tense, as borne out by the recent murder of four Roma who had returned to Kosovo after seeking asylum in Belgium.
Naturally the all-important question is: what future does Kosovo have within Yugoslavia?
We PSE members reject any fanciful notions of an independent Kosovo.
We are therefore looking forward with bated breath to the first meeting between President Kostunica and Mr Rugova.
Perhaps the European Union could act as a mediator in this.
However, we ought not to focus on Kosovo alone.
By and large, things are moving in the right direction.
I would call it a return to normality, all be it a gradual one.
Last year belonged to true democracy, which was on the up and up, and to those politicians who eschew nationalism as the sole vehicle for politics.
They have replaced three politicians who personified the worst aspects of former Yugoslavia in the nineties.
I am referring to Tudjman, Milosevic and Izetbegovic.
The government in Zagreb is helping us to think about the future of the region, and making real investments in democracy and stability.
Tomorrow we are due to receive the new President of Yugoslavia in this House.
As I see it, they are the new heroes of the Balkans and of course they are more than welcome.
Croatia must soon be given the opportunity to strengthen its ties with the European Union.
As far as I am concerned, apart from Slovenia it will be the first country from former Yugoslavia to qualify for EU membership in the future.
What Serbia deserves most of all at this point in time is material aid, and the sooner the better.
Europe must clearly demonstrate that its aid is making a difference, even before the parliamentary elections in Serbia.
However, as far as I am concerned, this week' s star price goes to the leader of the Social Democrats in Bosnia, and, incidentally, to the people of Slovakia, for not falling into the referendum trap that the opposition set for the government, but that is another story.
I read in some reports about the elections in Bosnia that the extreme nationalists have won at the parliamentary elections held in Bosnia Herzegovina.
On the face of it, that appears to be true, particularly in the Republika Srpska and in the Croatian part.
In the Bosnian part, the position of the nationalists has come under attack for the first time ever.
In any event, the changes taking place in Croatia and Serbia are starting to have an effect on the situation there.
The Social Democrats have done remarkably well there.
There is nothing untoward about that in Europe, or even in the Balkans, but what is striking is that this party is multi-ethnic and openly defends this.
At recent gatherings in Sarajevo, the leader of this party, Zlatko Lagumdzija, in the company of Serbs, Croats, Montenegrins, Albanians and other representatives from the region, introduced the concept of reconstruction of the spirit, thereby getting right to the heart of the matter.
We must concentrate our energies in the physical reconstruction of former Yugoslavia, but this will only work if we manage to alter the people' s frame of mind too.
Those politicians who openly work for such a cause deserve not only our admiration, but above all, our support.
They alone can bring down the bastion of nationalism.
The stability of the region will depend on the extent to which the new leaders are able to keep the lid on the national spirit and develop a different kind of mentality.
Their political fate will also depend on how successfully the EU is able to deliver aid.
The reports by Mr Westendorp and Mr Lagendijk provide the foundation we need for an efficient approach to the matter.
Mr President, the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party is in favour of the reports we have for discussion, and we support the Commission' s attempt to make the very difficult work the European Union is doing for the Balkans more effective.
The aid has been too bureaucratic and too slow in coming, because the Commission has been too centralised and management-driven in its work.
There has been too much management in detail, and Parliament has been complicit in this on a number of points.
It is very unfortunate that the agency has been split up into a headquarters in Thessaloniki and an operations centre in Pristina. We have been opposed to this throughout.
Moreover, the arrangement has now also been criticised by the Court of Auditors.
It is good that, in this year' s Budget, EUR 175 million is being set aside for Kosovo and EUR 200 million for emergency aid for Serbia.
It is very unfortunate, however, that the appropriations to the UN' s administration in Kosovo, to the Baltic region and to the rapid reaction facility have been put in the reserves.
It is very unfortunate that there is no certainty regarding what we have by way of money for Serbia next year.
It is particularly unfortunate in view of the fact that the elected Serbian President is coming here tomorrow.
It is also unfortunate that a large number of programmes have been put in the so-called performance reserve.
I am well aware that Parliament wants in this way to force the Commission to behave better, but one ought not to take one' s own children hostage.
We should do much better to give the Commission a free hand in making the work effective, and we must reserve the right to criticise the Commission if the work is not a success.
We must not make ourselves partly liable for possible damage to programmes of which we are in favour.
Let us give the Commission larger appropriations and permission to delegate responsibility so that it becomes easier to make rapid decisions and to implement initiatives.
Let us celebrate the visit by the elected Serbian president tomorrow by now seriously giving the Commission a chance to put the aid we offer onto a new and better footing.
Mr President, the aid which we are discussing is yet another instrument of foreign intervention in this highly sensitive region of Europe.
International imperialism is well versed in the art of using the stick and the carrot, of alternating bombing incursions with humanitarian aid, destruction with reconstruction.
Its final objective is to subjugate people to the new world order.
What I want to know is how can those who sowed disaster talk of reconstruction?
How do murderers of children and civilians have the gall to give their victims lessons in democracy, the rule of law and human rights?
The imperialist forces owe Yugoslavia war reparation, not humanitarian aid.
The events which unfolded in Yugoslavia a few weeks ago, the so-called popular uprising, was backed by at least USD 100 million in foreign aid to the so-called "democratic opposition".
These events may well have created a climate of euphoria in leading imperialist circles; but they know full well that they have not subdued the spirit of resistance in the Yugoslavian or any other people.
That is why they are preparing military and police strike forces.
Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, we are all aware that the Western Balkans present a significant challenge for the European Union and the credibility of its foreign policy, due to the scale of our human, political and financial commitment in the region, and also our desire to facilitate stabilisation through the construction, development and finally reintegration of the Balkan region into the European family.
This year began on a positive note with democratic change in Croatia, as a result of the parliamentary and presidential elections it held.
It continued with another major event in the form of the victory of democratic forces in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the fall of Milosevic.
We indeed hope that the year will end with the consolidation of democracy on 23 December during the parliamentary elections in Serbia.
As you will be aware, the European Union, has contributed significantly to these historic developments.
It reacted immediately to the new order in Croatia, by undertaking the process that will lead, at the Zagreb summit on 24 November, in other words in ten days' time, to the opening of negotiations aimed at concluding a Stabilisation and Association Agreement with this country.
As it had made a similar commitment to the people of Serbia, it took the necessary steps on the election of President Kostunica, whom you are to meet tomorrow. These steps included the lifting of sanctions that had been imposed on the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, emergency assistance to the value of EUR 200 million granted by the European Council meeting in Biarritz, and the integration of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia into the international community, all with a view to supporting the process of the consolidation of democracy.
I should like to speak in more detail about the priorities set by the Presidency-in-Office for the Western Balkans.
Thinking ahead to the summit in Zagreb, we wanted to focus the Union' s action on consolidating democracy and evaluating the Stabilisation and Association Process.
To this end we have set two aims; the first is to develop regional cooperation, and the second is to implement a genuine policy to encourage a rapprochement between these countries and the European Union.
At Cologne, the European Council offered countries the opportunity to join the European Union.
At Feira, the Council considered those countries participating in the Stabilisation and Association Process as potential applicants for membership of the European Union.
We intend to confirm the offer at the Zagreb summit, but also go one step further and define the measures each country needs to take and the reforms they need to put in place to this end.
Lastly, we intend to confirm that the process will receive Community support of the highest order.
On the initiative of France, for the first time the Zagreb Summit will gather together Heads of State and Government of the European Union and the countries of the Western Balkans that are participating in the Stabilisation and Association Process: Albania, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Croatia, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
This summit will provide an opportunity to draw conclusions at the highest level, with regard to the decisive democratic changes that have taken place in this region. As a result of this, we will be able to reaffirm the fact that the way is open for a rapprochement between all of the countries in the region and the European Union, within the framework of the Stabilisation and Association Process.
We should like to highlight the value of the process, for example by marking the conclusion of negotiations of the first Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia during the Zagreb Summit, or confirming an individual approach that is adapted to each country' s particular characteristics and, as I have already said, by outlining the prospects the process holds for each of us.
The summit will also aim to consolidate democracy in the FRY, support the process of reconciliation between these countries and neighbouring countries, and encourage the development of reliable cooperation between the countries in the region.
Therefore, the Union, without waiting for the Stabilisation and Association Agreements to be implemented, will remind the five countries concerned that it expects them, as of now, to conclude regional cooperation agreements between themselves.
Such agreements, that were provided for within the framework of the Stabilisation and Association Agreements, should, in our view, include the initiation of political dialogue, a regional free trade area, as well as close collaboration in the field of justice and home affairs, in particular with a view to strengthening the judiciary and its independence in the fight against organised crime, corruption, money laundering and all other forms of criminal trafficking.
Any rapprochement with the European Union is, in fact, closely linked, in the eyes of the Council, to the development of regional cooperation.
Examination of the reports by Mr Westendorp y Cabeza and Mr Lagendijk on proposals for a Regulation concerning a framework programme on the one hand, and the European Agency for Reconstruction on the other, provide us with an opportunity to assess the scale of the support that the Union intends to give the Western Balkans in relation to the Stabilisation and Association Process.
Both reports are along the right lines.
The Presidency-in-Office, like you, would like this framework programme to implement the principles of the reform of the management of external aid: fewer procedures, greater coordination out in the field, fewer outstanding commitments.
Similarly, we support the extension to the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia of the activity of the European Agency for Reconstruction, which proved its effectiveness in Kosovo.
We would like to see the programmes assigned to it by the Commission implemented more efficiently and speedily.
The Council Presidency aims to reach an agreement on the proposals for a Regulation regarding the CARDS programme and the European Agency for Reconstruction during the General Affairs Council at the end of November, in other words next week, so as to be able to make an announcement at Zagreb on 24 November.
I should like to remind you that the main priorities of the CARDS programme are the strengthening of institutions with regard to democracy and the rule of law, economic development and reconstruction, and regional cooperation.
The CARDS programme should therefore improve the cohesiveness, effectiveness and visibility of the assistance provided by the European Union to the region.
At the Budget Council on 20 July, the Member States unanimously decided to refocus the debate on the total amount of the financial envelope set aside for CARDS for the period 2000-2006 within the context of respect for the ceiling of heading 4 of the Financial Perspective, as determined by the European Council in Berlin.
This amount, which will include assistance for the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, will result from a unanimous decision regarding the way in which the EUR 10 billion available under the ceiling of heading 4 will be distributed between the two aid programmes, MEDA II and CARDS, the adoption of which will feature among our priorities.
Lastly, during the General Affairs Council on 18 September, the Presidency-in-Office adopted asymmetric commercial preferences for the benefit of those countries that are participating in the Stabilisation and Association Process.
These measures accord preferential access to the Community market for agricultural and industrial products produced by these countries.
By adopting these measures, the European Union has performed an exceptional gesture, as this process of liberalisation, in particular as regards agricultural products, has been offered practically without conditions or rights.
Such measures entered into force on 1 November and the Council is currently working to extend them to the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
The French Presidency set itself ambitious targets as regards the Western Balkans which are close to being achieved: the development of the Stabilisation and Association Process, the adoption of the CARDS programme, the adoption of asymmetric commercial preferences, to mention but the more noteworthy Community measures.
The long-awaited victory of democracy in Croatia, and then in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, forces the European Union, as we are well aware, to take things much further.
This is why we must deliver a very strong political message at the Zagreb summit, one that is in line with the high hopes for peace and reconciliation that the peoples of the countries in the region have placed in this democratic change.
The European Union must not be afraid to say to these countries: yes, your place, your future is within the European family.
Mr President, my initial impression of President Kostunica is that he has been very pragmatic in his political dealings since he assumed power in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
He has consolidated his victory but has equally been tactful in his relations with other leaders in the region.
He has already visited Sarajevo, he has attended an informal regional meeting in Skopje and he has also been to Moscow.
The European Union was right to react positively to President Kostunica's accession to power.
Visa restrictions have been loosened and the oil and flight embargo has now been lifted.
The fact that the Commission has allocated EUR 200 million in emergency and assistance support from the NGOs is to be commended.
I hope that President Kostunica and his supporters will steadily consolidate their position as the new democratic leadership in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia at all political levels.
Elections for the Serbian Parliament are scheduled to take place on 23 December.
I welcome the fact that President Kostunica has acknowledged the importance of cooperating with the War Crimes Tribunal in The Hague.
An invitation has been extended to President Kostunica to participate, as the new President of Yugoslavia, at the forthcoming Zagreb summit.
This summit, instead of being a showcase award for Croatia's efforts towards democratisation, will now inevitably shift towards celebrating President Kostunica's achievements.
It is very important to assure the other Balkan participants that the return of Yugoslavia to the international community will in no way lessen their support from the European Union.
Due attention must be paid to the sensitivities of all countries in the Balkan region and to assure them that they will not be neglected in the general euphoria over President Kostunica's accession to power.
Other objectives of the Zagreb summit must include an announcement of the Community assistance and reconstruction, democratisation and stabilisation programmes for the Western Balkans, a confirmation of the progressive establishment of a free trading zone between the European Union and the Western Balkans and a commitment by the countries in the region for regional cooperation and to putting in place a free trading regime between them.
This debate is now suspended and will be resumed at 9.00 p.m.
Ms Pack wishes to make a point of order.
Please make sure it is a point of order and not a continuation of the debate with Mr Moscovici.
Unfortunately, Mr Moscovici was not here when I spoke.
I should like him to tell me if he supports the addition of another objective to the objectives listed in the CARDS programme, namely support for education and training in south-east Europe.
This is an important new objective in the CARDS programme.
The Commission is in favour and I should like very much to know if the Council is too.
This is an interesting question in my view, and one which I believe has the Commission' s support.
We shall therefore study it within the Council.
Question Time (Council)
The next item is Question Time (B5-0553/2000). We shall examine questions to the Council.
Question No 1 by (H-0818/00):
Subject: Rapid Reaction Facility Why has this proposal not been discussed formally under the French Council Presidency, although work had certainly begun on this issue under its predecessors?
On 10 May, the Commission presented a proposal to Coreper aimed at setting up a rapid reaction facility with a view to meeting the expectations expressed by Heads of State and Government at Helsinki.
During the European Council, within the framework of the report on the development of European facilities for military and civilian crisis management, it was suggested that rapid financing mechanisms, such as the creation by the Commission of a rapid reaction fund, should be set up to speed up the provision of finance to support European Union activities, to contribute to operations run by other international organisations and to fund NGO activities, where appropriate.
In line with the mandate given by Coreper, studies of this project are being carried out by the group of Foreign Affairs Ministers.
It was first examined on 6 November.
The aim is to adopt a regulation as soon as possible but, in order to achieve this, the Council must have Parliament' s opinion in due form.
Thank you for that reply.
When I tabled this question there was in fact a log-jam in the Council and there was no discussion, which was the purpose for tabling the question.
But I welcome the fact that now there is movement within the Council and that we in the Committee on Foreign Affairs actually have a copy of your latest document saying what the compromise looks to be.
Mr President-in-Office, you want Parliament's opinion and we understand you propose taking a decision next month in December.
If I tell you that Parliament will be debating this in January, I should like to know if you will wait for our opinion before you take your decision?
I can only repeat what I said in the conclusion of my reply, namely that we aim to adopt a regulation as soon as possible, but, in order to do so, the Council has to have the European Parliament' s opinion in due form.
This is essential.
As they deal with the same subject, Questions Nos 2 and 3 will be taken together.
Question No 2 by (H-0819/00):
Subject: Western Sahara On 13-15 September a delegation from the European Parliament' s Intergroup on Peace for the Sahrawi People, in which I participated, visited the Sahrawi refugee camps in South-Eastern Algeria.
There we met the highest authorities of the RASD (Sahrawi Democratic Republic), including its president, and representatives of Minurso.
Minurso has done remarkable work in identifying people with a view to drawing up electoral lists prior to the holding of the referendum on self-determination referred to in the UN Secretary-General' s settlement plan signed by the Moroccan Government and the Polisario Front. However, the very large number of objections raised - particularly from Morocco - is clearly an obstacle to holding this referendum in practice.
The delegation noted the terrible living conditions of the refugees.
The constant postponement of the referendum, and the failure of negotiations in Berlin on 28 September 2000, are raising serious concerns and engendering deep disappointment among the people.
We also noted that there were high expectations of a clearer commitment by European Union to settling this conflict which, which is an obstacle to any prospect of stability in the region.
Reiterating the calls made by the European Parliament in its resolution of 16 March 2000, what initiatives does the Presidency of the European Council propose to take with a view to playing a more active role so as to guarantee the full and complete application of the UN peace plan?
Question No 3 by (H-0846/00):
Subject: Referendum on self-determination for Western Sahara The talks under way between the international mediator, UN Secretary­General special envoy James Baker, and the parties in dispute over the holding of a referendum on self­determination for Western Sahara, are in a state of deadlock.
At the meeting held on 28 September in Berlin, the Moroccan authorities suggested that they might end their support for the peace plan for organisation of the referendum.
The President of the Commission is scheduled to visit Morocco and Algeria in November.
What action is the Council taking or does it intend to take in support of the peace plan, in order that the referendum may be held as soon as possible and the dangers for the region of renewed conflict thus avoided?
What is the Council's political assessment of the current impasse and how does it intend to contribute to a fair solution to the conflict?
The Council of the European Union supports the process set in motion by the United Nations.
It also supports the current endeavours of the UN Secretary-General' s Special Envoy, Mr James Baker - who seems somewhat concerned with other matters at present but this will soon change - to find a fair and mutually acceptable solution to the Western Sahara question.
The Council seeks to help foster a climate of confidence between the parties involved and ensure that this is achieved.
Resolving the conflict in the Western Sahara will help bring stability to the Maghreb and aid its economic and social development.
However, the fact remains that this issue falls within the remit of the United Nations Organisation and the Special Envoy of its Secretary-General, whose perseverance in this complex matter must be supported.
For several months, Mr Baker' s mission has been twofold; he has sought both to resolve the difficulties inherent in implementing the Settlement Plan, which should lead to a referendum on self-determination for the Sahrawi people, and to reach a political agreement.
Both parties have just been granted a new deadline of four months - by Resolution 1324 - to try and make some progress on both counts.
The Council, nonetheless, remains concerned by the conditions endured by the people in the camps at Tindouf from a humanitarian point of view and in terms of food supplies.
The active commitment of the European Union in this regard is worth highlighting, as it is the largest provider of humanitarian aid to the Sahrawi refugees through its ECHO programme, through which EUR 10.58 million have been allocated for the period 1999-2000.
In addition to this, EUR 9 million if aid is being provided as of November 2000 for a period of eight months.
Thank you for your reply.
You referred to a mutually acceptable solution.
I myself have visited the camps at Tindouf where this extremely difficult situation has been going on for 25 years.
It must be noted, however, that one of the parties involved, Morocco in this instance, that has diplomatic weight and the wheels of state at its disposal, is making less of an effort to ensure that the peace plan, in other words the Houston agreements that it did, in fact, sign, is implemented.
It continues to talk about the problem of territorial integrity, a term used by the King, particularly during his last official speech.
Now, the issue relates to the self-determination of a nation and the implementation of United Nations resolutions.
Whatever the result of the referendum - independence or annexation to Morocco - it seems to me that democracy is what will finally resolve this conflict most effectively.
Otherwise, the exacerbation of current tensions and the possible return to arms would be dangerous for the region as a whole at a time when we are discussing - and we were even doing so earlier in this Chamber - the resumption of the Euro-Mediterranean partnership.
How can we even consider reviving this partnership without first resolving the conflict?
We are well aware of the close links between the European Union and Morocco and, in particular, between France and Morocco, which is why I wanted to ask Mr Moscovici if he could inform us as to the content and nature of negotiations that he is currently holding with the Moroccan Government on the Western Sahara question.
At the end of the meeting held in Berlin on 28 September 2000, as you will be aware, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Morocco made a speech in which he reasserted his willingness to do everything possible in order to find a sustainable and definitive solution.
Mr Rabat now seems to have realised that this proposal did not meet either the UN Secretary-General or his Special Envoy' s expectations, and that it should have formed the basis for seeking a just and definitive solution to the problem.
As a result, Morocco dispatched its Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation to New York on 26 October to attend a private meeting with the Security Council after a similar meeting was held with the Secretary-General of the Polisario Front on 19 October.
During his speech, Mr Ben Aïssa stated that a complete file on the scope and content of Morocco' s proposal would be presented the next time the parties met under the auspices of Mr Baker.
According to Mr Ben Aïssa, all Morocco had done at the meeting in Berlin was to put forward a proposal for dialogue and sketched an outline of what its content should be.
France is of the opinion that the willingness Morocco demonstrated in Berlin constitutes an initial step towards finding a way out of the current deadlock the settlement process has reached, and it must be considered as the basis for finding a solution.
However, more details need to be provided and the substance of its content improved if it is to constitute a genuine political offer that can be considered by all of the parties involved.
This is the message we have given our counterparts in Morocco.
Mr President, Mr President-in-Office, I think the EU would have far more influence in the Maghreb if there were stronger links with the reform process in Morocco.
I should like to ask about progress with the association agreement with Morocco.
As you know, we have already debated the fisheries agreement.
That is another problem which needs to be resolved.
But the question of the association agreement is, I think, extremely urgent.
Question No 4 by (H-0820/00):
Subject: The safe transport of radioactive materials in the EU What consultations took place between the Council (Transport, Environment and Energy Ministers), and the French Presidency and the Standing Working group (of experts) on the safe Transport of Radioactive Materials in the EU, prior to - or subsequent to - the announcement by the German Government in September 2000 that it intended to resume the cross-border transport of radioactive materials, which was suspended in May 1998 because of safety concerns?
The transport of radioactive materials in France is carried out in accordance with the legislation in force and, in particular, Council Directive 94/55/EC of 21 November 1994 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States with regard to the transport of dangerous goods by road, and Council Directive 96/49/EC of 23 July 1996 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States with regard to the transport of dangerous goods by rail, which apply to the transport of radioactive materials and set out various technical requirements in relation to vehicles, brands and packing.
The organisation of the transport of radioactive materials between France and Germany has been the subject of bilateral negotiations between the two countries, in which neither the Council of Ministers, nor the French Presidency-in-Office as such, were involved.
I can simply point out the fact that France and Germany - and here I am no longer speaking as President-in-Office of the Council - raised these questions during a bilateral summit in Vittel last week, where it was decided to form a working group in order to find a solution to the problem.
I regret to inform the Minister that he really has not answered my question.
I asked what consultations took place between the Council, the French Presidency and the standing working group of experts.
I asked that question because just three weeks after the Council's expert group, the standing working group on the safe transport of radioactive materials, published a report in April 1998 giving a clean bill of health to the way nuclear wastes were transported, the transports were found to be contaminated, as the Minister very well knows.
As they are about to be resumed, so we hear - and I am glad to hear all these consultations are taking place - can we place any credibility in the working group on waste?
It said everything was hunky-dory but then the transports were found to be contaminated.
In the light of that, why are there only representatives from the nuclear industry and government on this working group of experts?
Why cannot we have independent experts who have detailed information which could be relevant?
Could I ask the Minister to answer to the point?
We have decided, I repeat, to set up a working group.
Generally speaking, this is a bilateral issue, but, rest assured, it is one we indeed intend to resolve.
I am not saying this to rule out certain considerations but in order to put an end to the problem.
Question No 5 by (H-0826/00):
Subject: EU initiatives in dispute between Armenia and Azerbaijan Recently, following many years of conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan - which have resulted in devastating economic stagnation and severe damage to the social fabric of the two countries - there have been signs of reciprocal attempts at rapprochement to break the current deadlock between the two countries and embark on reconstruction.
According to the International Herald Tribune of 7 September 2000, the Presidents of Armenia and Azerbaijan, Robert Kocharian and Heydar Aliyev respectively, have had at least 11 meetings with each other in recent times.
The EU has so far remained a passive onlooker in the face of the two countries' endeavours and has taken no initiative, leaving the field open for other strategic players to make moves in their own interests.
What diplomatic initiatives will the Council take to further the rapprochement between Armenia and Azerbaijan, settle their bilateral differences, and promote cooperation between the two countries?
The stability and development of the Caucasus are one of the European Union' s strategic priorities.
As you will be aware, the European Union supports the mediation efforts currently in progress with a view to finding a political solution to all of the conflicts in the region, on the basis of respect for the territorial integrity of the states concerned and an appropriate degree of autonomy.
The Union is therefore closely monitoring contacts between Armenia and Azerbaijan with a view to finding a solution to the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict, which is why it welcomes the meetings that have regularly taken place between the two Presidents and hopes that they will lead to a political solution.
The European Union remains convinced that the Minsk Group of the OSCE has a central role to play in finding a solution to the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict, in spite of the fact that the solutions put forward by this group in 1997 and 1998 were both rejected by Erevan and Baku.
The European Union is also using all of the instruments at its disposal within the framework of the partnership and cooperation agreement to help improve relations between the two countries.
Thanks to the various opportunities for cooperation, it has been possible to establish regular political dialogue with the aim of facilitating exchanges between Armenia and Azerbaijan.
At the same time, the Union continues to provide substantial material aid to both countries through its various programmes, in particular its TACIS programme.
It has offered to finance cross-border projects of common interest in an attempt to re-establish good neighbourly relations between the two countries.
The commitment of the European Union has been publicly acknowledged by Armenia and Azerbaijan, who have both asserted their willingness to work towards a rapprochement between their countries and the European Union.
The President-in-Office's reply, I am sorry to say, is far from satisfactory.
It smacks of formal, departmental despatches rather than political initiative.
The Caucasus needs a more extensive plan and more extensive initiatives if it is to be stabilised.
And a European Union which - from what I have read in the newspapers - recently changed its strategy on its energy problems and is now looking more towards the former Soviet Union - with all the implications which that has for the region in general - obviously cannot remain passive and fail to react to developments.
So from this point of view, and because, of course, the question was not asked in order to elicit an expression of satisfaction that everything is just fine but in order to express a concern, I think that it could be used as the starting point for an integrated policy, such as that which we have been debating recently for the Balkans; in other words, a new stability agreement for the Caucasus, at the political initiative of the European Union and with political objectives and priorities concerning development, autonomy and democracy in this region.
Mr President, I shall start by reiterating the question put by Mr Souladakis, i.e. what sort of initiatives has the European Union taken on this major problem, which has reduced a rich region to this sorry state?
More specifically, because one of the main issues which is causing problems in the region is the embargo which Turkey has imposed on Armenia, I should like to ask the President-in-Office if, during the negotiations and discussions being held with Turkey at the moment, the question has been raised, albeit academically, of Turkey's lifting its embargo on Armenia, which is reducing the country to poverty and misery.
I understand the concerns expressed by Mr Souladakis and Mr Alavanos, but I do not have anything to add regarding the action taken by the European Union as it has been carried out.
As regards discussions with Turkey, we have just held an important debate on this issue and you are well aware of the European Union' s position with regard to this matter.
As the author is not present, Question No 6 lapses.
Question No 7 by (H-0832/00):
Subject: Legislative proposals to prevent concealment of refugees The French Presidency has put forward several proposals to tighten up legislation applying to persons who transport or hide refugees who do not have the right to be in the EU.
The proposals cover anyone who hides refugees, including anyone who does so without financial gain.
The proposals also enable the Member States to impose various penalties on or even disband organisations which hide refugees.
Does the Presidency consider that this option to disband organisations should also extend to non-profit organisations such as churches, monasteries and parties?
The tragic events in Dover last June were a cruel reminder of the need to fight more effectively against illegal immigration rings.
The European Council in Feira last June called upon the Council to speed up the implementation of measures combating illegal rings, provided for in the conclusions of the Tampere European Council of October 1999.
The measures to which the author of the question refers comprise a draft Council Directive aimed at defining the concept of the facilitation of unauthorised entry, movement and residence and a draft framework decision designed specifically to strengthen the penal framework combating the facilitation of unauthorised entry and illegal residence as defined therein.
These texts, which have been submitted to the European Parliament for consultation, are currently being examined by the relevant groups within the Council.
They are essentially aimed at combating the trafficking of human beings, which occurs through the facilitation of illegal immigration by organised rings.
The aim is to disband and punish those criminal organisations that are involved in this type of traffic.
The question raised therefore provides the Presidency-in-Office with an opportunity to clarify several points.
The texts concerned are not aimed at preventing potential refugees from exercising their right to seek asylum on Union territory.
Mr Sjöstedt will agree, in fact, that a potential refugee is not ipso facto an illegal immigrant.
What is more, these texts are not designed to prevent non-profit making organisations from carrying out their work, provided, of course, that they comply with the laws in force.
It is therefore a matter of fighting against criminal organisations that are involved in the trafficking of human beings, not disbanding non-governmental, charitable, political and denominational organisations, except of course - though I cannot imagine this ever happening - in the event of their activities serving as a cover for illegal acts.
We agree that the situation in Dover calls for a reaction on our part, but I also think it shows something else.
In the Danish media, we have heard a 14 year-old Afghan boy say that, if you have to become a refugee, you need an agent.
The word 'agent' was his own, but to some extent it shows how difficult it is for refugees in fact to make their way to a place in which they can request asylum, and that is of course where the whole problem lies.
I should like to ask how the Council views the fact that this further contributes to criminalising humanitarian actions.
It is as if we stand midstream at a place where two currents, formed of immigrants and refugees, often combine.
What is the Council thinking of?
If this area is further criminalised, the result will be to have contributed to a situation in which only unscrupulous and cynical people and those out to make money from the situation will stay behind.
Is it really the Council' s policy to help bring about a situation in which the money of poor and persecuted people ends up in the clutches of the mafia and similar organisations?
I think that the European texts are intended to encourage each Member State to take the necessary measures to ensure that the act of facilitating, directly or indirectly, the unauthorised entry, movement or residence in its territory of an alien who is not a national of a Member State of the European Union is regarded as an offence.
This is the general philosophy behind them.
Mr President, I welcome the Council's response to the original question.
I just want the Minister to re-emphasise that this proposed legislation is aimed at those who exploit and make profit out of people in a desperate situation and is not aimed at further criminalising the immigrant or potential immigrant.
It is about stopping gangs making money out of immigrants.
That is what happened in Dover.
It was organised business that ended up with people dying in the back of a truck because people were making money out of them. That is what we must end.
Would the Council also - and this is where I agree with Mrs Frahm - encourage the Member States to differentiate more clearly between asylum-seekers and illegal immigrants?
At the moment it seems that Member States are beginning to forget their international obligations.
We have an international obligation to treat asylum-seekers properly and to deal with them through specified procedures.
Some Member States now seem to be confusing asylum-seekers and illegal immigrants.
Mr Martin is right, as we are indeed concerned with fighting criminal organisations involved in the trafficking of human beings and not reviewing previous texts that enable potential refugees to exercise their right to seek asylum on Union territory.
This is our purpose and this alone.
I should also like to add that these two texts focus, in particular, on strengthening the framework of criminal law in order to fight organised rings of facilitators.
It is precisely this type of act and this type of organisation that we resolutely wish to combat.
Mr President, Minister, even if I have now been given explanations, I do not properly understand why this imprecise and to some extent inhumane proposal has been tabled at all.
Would it not be more sensible and more appropriate for the EU' s governments and the Council of Ministers to reflect upon why people are forced to find their way illegally to Europe?
I should like to ask the minister how many countries there are whose citizens are at present required by the EU' s Member States to have entry visas.
Is it 10, 50 or perhaps 100 countries?
According to the latest information I have, it is 127 countries.
Is this figure correct?
If so, do you think this is reasonable, and do you believe it is in keeping with a humane asylum policy?
I have nothing further to add.
Question No 8 by (H-0836/00):
Subject: 'Crimes of honour' in Turkey Every year, dozens of women fall victim to 'crimes of honour' in Turkey.
Although Turkish law confers the same rights on women as men, in practice many men continue to condemn women to death for being raped, committing adultery or simply for meeting other men.
The men who commit the murders rarely receive long prison sentences, some get off with as little as two years.
The new legislation being drafted in Turkey, which prohibits reduced sentences, is necessary but it is even more important that Muslim leaders officially condemn 'crimes of honour', which are a direct violation of Islam.
There is a need both for legislation and measures to stimulate debate and increase awareness.
What will the Council do to encourage Turkey to take effective measures to combat 'crimes of honour'?
. (FR) Mrs Theorin has drawn the Council' s attention to the issue of crimes of honour in Turkey.
Such practices appear to be in sharp decline and, we are told, only occur sporadically in rural areas.
However, these crimes continue to be a source of concern for the Council as they are often committed in the most appalling circumstances.
The Turkish Government has undertaken significant reforms aimed at fighting such acts more effectively, acts which are, of course, not permitted by national law.
The report that was adopted by the Turkish cabinet on 21 September as a reform programme contains several planned amendments to the law, such as the inclusion of measures in the Civil Code that are designed to enhance effective equality between men and women in social and educational fields, ways to better combat domestic violence by training judges that specialise in family matters and, lastly, measures to prevent people that have committed crimes of honour from serving reduced sentences.
Rest assured that the Council will remain particularly vigilant as to the implementation of these measures that are in line with the Copenhagen criteria, as discussed at length earlier on.
In any case, the issue of crimes of honour is not a problem that is specific to Turkey, as these crimes occur in many other places around the world.
The Council has therefore supported the Dutch initiative aimed at the introduction this year, within the framework of the third committee of the United Nations General Assembly, of a draft resolution against these crimes, which is still in the process of being examined.
The Council notes that Turkey has also given its support to this initiative.
Without pretending to understand how so barbaric a phenomenon as crimes of honour can be explained, it can be seen how, every year, dozens of Turkish women are murdered in cold blood by their brothers, fathers, cousins or husbands, with the express motive of maintaining the family' s honour.
For the family - and especially for the men of the family - status, credit and honour reside in having a large number of possessions, including female family members.
According to this view, male family members have a right and a duty to take the life of a female family member who, for some reason, reduces her value as an unviolated woman.
It makes no great difference whether she has transgressed voluntarily or against her will, that is to say been raped.
It is good that the Council should point out the initiatives taken.
It is important to prohibit reduced sentences, but it is still more important to counter the general acceptance of crimes of honour.
My question to the Council is this: Are you prepared to make efforts to put a stop to the spiral of violence by, for example, demanding that Muslim leaders officially distance themselves from crimes of honour?
In my view, we must indeed do everything within our power, absolutely everything, to combat such crimes, and I note that the Council, the United Nations General Assembly and the Turkish Government, as far as I know, are prepared to do this.
Such retrograde practices which have no place in a modern world cannot continue.
Question No 9 by (H-0839/00):
Subject: Attitude of French European Affairs Minister, Pierre Moscovici, to Austria In an interview with the French TV channel France 3, the French European Affairs Minister, Pierre Moscovici, affirmed yet again his rejection of the Austrian Federal Government.
He continued moreover to assert that the government coalition between the ÖVP (Austrian People's Party) and the FPÖ (Freedom Party of Austria) was 'abnormal' and that the FPÖ was a 'racist and xenophobic party'.
How can the Council justify the situation where an official representative of the French Presidency of the Council can, notwithstanding the favourable verdict handed down in the experts' report on Austria and the consequent lifting of the unjustified 'sanctions' against Austria, continue unopposed publicly to assert such a rejectionist, aggressive and offensive attitude to another European Union country that is a full member on an equal footing?
Can the Council clarify whether those statements by the French European Affairs Minister also represent the attitude of the French EU Council Presidency, or if this was the expression of a private opinion by Mr Moscovici?
Can the Council confirm that Austria and its Federal Government will suffer no disadvantages or unequal treatment in the pursuit of major, large-scale European projects as a consequence of Mr Moscovici's statements and attitude?
When will the Council publicly distance itself from Mr Moscovici's statements and clarify its reactions to them?
It is true that when I first saw this question I did wonder what the French European Affairs Minister had said as he - and I quote the question - 'affirmed once again his rejection of the Austrian Federal Government.
He continued moreover to assert that the government coalition between the ÖVP (Austrian People' s Party) and the FPÖ (Freedom Party of Austria) was abnormal and that the FPÖ was a racist and xenophobic party.'
The author of the question continued: 'How can the Council justify the situation where an official representative of the French Presidency of the Council continues, unopposed, to assert such a rejectionist, aggressive and offensive attitude towards another EU country which is a full member on an equal footing?
Can the Council clarify whether those statements made by the French European Affairs Minister also represent the attitude of the French EU Council Presidency, or whether this was the expression of Mr Moscovici's private opinion?
Lastly, can the Council confirm that Austria and its Federal Government will suffer no disadvantage and no unequal treatment in the pursuit of major, large-scale European projects as a consequence of Mr Moscovici' s statements and attitude?
When will the Council publicly distance itself from Moscovici' s statements and clarify its reactions to them?'
Not this evening, and here I come to my answer, as I know the Minister and I can give you the Council' s response.
In response to the question posed by Mr Karas, the Presidency-in-Office should like to highlight the fact that the political situation in Austria and the sanctions imposed bilaterally by the other Member States and then lifted were not carried out at the Council' s instigation, precisely because they were bilateral measures.
The Presidency-in-Office therefore has no answer to give with regard to this point.
However, it goes without saying that, as the sanctions have been lifted, it is no longer an issue of making Austria suffer any disadvantage or unequal treatment because the sanctions are no longer in place.
On the other hand, and speaking on a more personal level, I can confirm that the statements this Minister made on France 3 clearly reflect his personal opinion on the matter.
Mr President, Mr President-in-Office, it is clear from your reply that you personally are holding the Council to ransom.
It is also clear that your personal prejudices, which bear no relation to the situation in Austria and contradict the experts' report, also have a great deal of influence on your function as President-in-Office, as can be seen from your itinerary in preparation for the French President's and the President-in-Office's tour des capitales.
My question, therefore, is when do you intend to start performing all your duties in a way which reflects the spirit of Robert Schuman, the content of the experts' report and the situation in Austria, and leaving your personal prejudices to one side?
I have no personal views on this particular matter, though I, like everybody else, both here and elsewhere, am at liberty to make a political analysis on the nature of government.
What is more, I note that the wise men have spoken and that, for example, the adjectives 'racist' and 'xenophobic' were used in their report, albeit as part of a question.
With regard to the other points, I can assure you that as President-in-Office, these personal view points have no bearing whatsoever on matters.
I repeat: none whatsoever.
The Austrian Government is the legitimate government of a country in the European Union and it is up to us whether we approve or disapprove of the way it is made up.
It is precisely because the other 14 Member States disapproved that they imposed sanctions against it.
These sanctions are no longer in place today and, as a result, we shall treat this government as we do any other.
This, moreover, has always been the case within the European Union, as the sanctions taken against Austria were done so on a bilateral basis, which is something I should like to stress.
You therefore have my full assurance that, within the framework of the European Union, the Austrian Government is considered to be on a completely equal footing with all of the other countries and it participates in all of the Council meetings that are held under the auspices of this Presidency.
The term of the Head of State and President of the Republic, Jacques Chirac, will, of course, come to an end at Vienna, this is clear.
I should like to mention that the President of the Republic will be accompanied, as is usually the case, by one of his government ministers, either the Minister for Foreign Affairs or myself.
Next week, a meeting of the European Conference will take place on my invitation in France, in other words a meeting with the candidate countries.
I have been informed that Mrs Ferrero-Waldner intends to come and I will be only too pleased to see her.
All of this shows therefore that we need to clarify several facts.
On one hand there is the French Presidency of the European Union, which has to fulfil its duties and do so in a wholly objective manner, and on the other hand there is the political opinion that any politician may impart with regard to a political situation, which is something I am not to change.
Mr President, I share the President-in-Office's view that extreme right-wing parties in governments have lost nothing; nor could they in Austria because extreme right-wing parties are banned in Austria.
My question to the President-in-Office is this: how is it that extreme right-wing parties are not banned in France and what is the President-in-Office's opinion of extreme left-wing parties in government?
Allow me a brief comment, Mr President: I love France, I love the French and the charm of French men is, as a rule - I repeat, as a rule - unsurpassed.
The digressions on France and the charm of French men are all very interesting in this Parliament, but the President-in-Office of the Council must answer in his capacity as such.
Not as a French male nor in terms of domestic politics.
I simply wondered why you used 'for example' with regard to your reference about the charming nature of the French, as I thought charm was a general characteristic; at least I hoped it was.
As regards the issue in question, I simply wanted to say that there was no discrimination being made against any particular country.
If, for example, and here I am talking as a Minister, France was to elect an extreme right-wing party to office tomorrow, I would hope that the other countries would take measures against it similar to those taken against Austria.
This demonstrates therefore that one country is not being singled out for discrimination over another.
The European Union has certain values, which make it difficult for it to accept some countries taking on particular responsibilities.
That is the political position.
Having said that, I should like to make it clear, Mrs Flemming, that, in general, I like Austria and Austrian people.
I shall answer your first point very clearly.
These bilateral sanctions have demonstrated their scope and limitations.
They were imposed and then lifted and, in my view, show that we need to submit proposals for the creation of legal mechanism to be provided for in the treaties.
In this regard, several countries, including Austria, have put forward proposals to amend Article 7 of the Treaty on European Union, in order to set up a prevention and warning mechanism which would mean that a country considered to be out of step with the values of the European Union can receive recommendations while at the same time having its point of view heard.
This was the proposal put forward by the Austrian Government, for example.
I can assure you that this proposal has been fully considered and, in my view, we should seek to amend the Treaty along such lines, within the framework of the IGC.
As regards the other points, I have not used the words 'extreme left' and 'extreme right' here because this would run the risk of a debate on the definition of both notions.
When you say that extreme right-wing parties are banned in Austria, that is all well and good, but one might also question what does or does not constitute the notion of the extreme right.
I personally wanted to talk about values: I have spoken about values as they appear in our texts and I have spoken about the values that appear in the European Union Charter of Fundamental Rights, and I have spoken, in particular, it is true, about the fight against all forms of discrimination, as appears on the title page of all European texts and which is something we should ensure is respected.
Question No 10 by (H-0842/00):
Subject: Council reply to letter from the Turkish Foreign Minister, Mr Cem In a supplementary question (Question Time of 5 September 2000 - Question H-610/00) I had the opportunity to ask the President-in-Office of the Council about the Council's response to the letter sent by the Turkish Foreign Minister, Mr Cem, to the 15 Foreign Ministers of the European Union in which he sought to promote his own interpretation of the Helsinki Summit conclusions.
The President-in-Office's reply that he did not have the specific answer to this question and his general statement that the Helsinki conclusions were the common point of reference of both parties certainly did not constitute an answer to the very specific observations made by Mr Cem in his letter.
Will the Council give its response to the assertion in Mr Cem's letter that in the partnership agreement there can be no link-up between the Cyprus problem and EU-Turkey relations and that such a link-up would constitute a violation of the terms of the Helsinki conclusions?
The Turkish Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr Cem, did in fact send a letter to his counterparts in the Member States of the European Union.
The Council did not receive a copy of this letter but the Presidency has, of course, replied to Mr Cem and all of the Member States were informed about the content of the reply given.
As regards the Accession Partnership with Turkey to which you referred, the Commission put forward its proposals on 8 November at the same time as it submitted its report on the progress made by each of the 13 applicant States regarding their application for membership.
The Council must now examine these proposals.
The Presidency still aims to adopt the partnership during the General Affairs Council on 20 November, which is why perhaps the issue was not dealt with in detail in the answer Mr Vedrine gave to Mr Cem.
The Presidency has, however, stressed in this instance how important it is for this partnership to become a useful mechanism in defining Turkey' s future national programme for adopting the Community acquis and for implementing its pre-accession strategy, in accordance with the terms and spirit of the conclusions of the Helsinki European Council.
I also think that the debate we had earlier on Turkey shows the spirit in which the Council and the Commission wish to work.
I thank the President-in-Office, who rightly referred to the proposal for a Council decision on the Accession Partnership, which is a new element.
Hence, my questions are quite specific and are based on the Commission text.
First, how can the Council possibly accept a text on Turkey in which the word minority and the word Kurd are nowhere to be found?
Secondly, how can the Council possibly accept a text in which the long-term objectives scarcely mention the Helsinki position on border disputes between a candidate country and a Member State of the European Union?
And thirdly, how can this sort of text simply include the Commission's ridiculous statement on the Cyprus question to the effect that Turkey has to support the efforts of the Secretary-General of the UN rather than accept a solution based on the resolutions of the UN?
On the issue of minorities and, in particular, the Kurdish question, I think that anyone listening to the debate which took place earlier will be well aware that both the Commission and the Council are aware of these issues and have duly taken them into consideration.
With regard to the political solution of the Cyprus question to which you referred, Mr Alavanos, it will of course continue to be an issue of debate with Turkey as we confirmed at Helsinki.
I should like to remind you that this political dialogue constitutes, along with the future Accession Partnership, one of the elements in Turkey' s pre-accession strategy, which was set out on this occasion.
Next Monday' s General Affairs Council on 20 November will specifically debate the proposal for an Accession Partnership that the Commission has just put forward, which contains extremely clear, explicit, specific references to the Helsinki conclusions.
It is in this spirit that we must proceed, and the Presidency-in-Office of the Council will do everything possible to reach the right agreement.
Mr President, I am surprised.
The situation, and I should like a response to it from the minister, is this: First, the Helsinki conclusions state that resolving the Cyprus problem is not a precondition to the accession of Cyprus.
But the Cyprus problem is not just any old problem.
It is the specific problem of the invasion and occupation of a significant part of the territory of a country which is a member of the UN and a candidate for membership of the European Union by another country which is also a member of the UN and also a candidate for membership of the European Union.
Are we are saying that the Cyprus question can be resolved without ending the occupation?
And what is his opinion of Mr Cem's position - the President-in-Office did not reply here - that there can be no link-up between the Cyprus question and furthering the Accession Partnership between Turkey and the European Union?
In other words, is it possible that this partnership will be furthered and that Turkey will join the European Union without ceasing to occupy Cyprus and removing its settlers from Cyprus?
If that is the case, you can hardly blame us for seeing the European Union as an imperialist organisation.
I attended the Helsinki European Council and was present when these issues were debated.
I know that we accepted - and when I say we I mean the 15 Member States, including Greece therefore - Turkey' s application.
We based our acceptance on some very precise conclusions that committed us and continue to commit us to the process.
This is what this is about, and nothing else.
There was a translation error.
I did not say that it is true that there is an imperialist regime in Turkey, but I did say that if the European Union accepted this rationale, in other words, the possibility of Turkey joining the European Union while it still occupied a large part of Cyprus, you cannot blame us for considering the European Union' s actions as imperialist.
There was no translation error in my reply.
As the author is not present, Question No 11 lapses.
Question No 12 by (H-0850/00):
Subject: Repercussions and features of Fisheries Agreement with Morocco Do the most recent negotiations between the European Union and the Kingdom of Morocco on securing a Fisheries Agreement suggest that such an agreement could be reached before the end of November 2000?
What would be the features of this new Fisheries Agreement?
Does it cover the sector' s basic needs? Does it give priority to meeting the needs of the Objective 1 regions concerned?
The Community aims to complete negotiations as soon as possible with a view to concluding a new Fisheries Agreement with Morocco.
In this regard, the calendar for negotiations that was recently set included one meeting per week, so we can be fairly optimistic that negotiations will be swiftly concluded.
Even though it is difficult at present to envisage the final details of such an agreement, it seems clear that we need to establish a framework for cooperation and partnership in the area of fisheries that is broader than the previous agreement, and extend it to encompass all of the fisheries sector.
The agreement will also take into consideration the need to ensure the sustainable use of resources and aid the development of the Moroccan fisheries sector.
Although it is still too early to assess the features of the future agreement in relation to the expectations of the sector, the Council can, however, assure Mrs Izquierdo Rojo that the Community' s priority is to safeguard the interests of the Community sector as regards the practice of sustainable fishing in Moroccan waters.
The Council, I can assure you, is well aware of the needs of all of the regions concerned, particularly those whose economies are main contributors to this agreement.
The Community will ensure that these needs are taken into consideration in the agreement.
Mr President, I am very grateful to the President of the Council for such a positive and to some extent optimistic and encouraging answer.
It must be remembered that the fisheries agreement with Morocco is much more than a simple fisheries agreement; as he knows, if this agreement were not reached, bearing in mind its significance, this fact might conceal a deterioration in the relations between the European Union and Morocco.
I should like to ask him if in the coming weeks the French Presidency is going to push for this agreement to be concluded at last.
Mr President-in-Office of the Council, it is essential that the French Presidency should push hard along this home straight because Commissioner Fischler lacks the Mediterranean imagination needed to be able to secure an agreement.
He is less likely to succeed in something which is purely Mediterranean, than Pitres, a village up in the Alpujarra mountains in Granada, is in getting its own port, or even the expansion of its port.
In view of this situation, my question is whether the French Presidency, which does have the will and the imagination, will make it possible for us to achieve a fisheries agreement, which is now vital after eleven months of having our fleet tied up.
Andalusia and Galicia, Objective 1 regions, need it and there are many other Europeans working at sea and on land who need this to succeed.
I do not know, especially as it is not exactly a Mediterranean who is negotiating this Fisheries Agreement but the Commissioner for Agriculture, Rural Development and Fisheries, Mr Franz Fischler.
However, I doubt very much that this will hinder his imagination in this case.
My reply was not really meant to be a show of optimism or hope, rather the expression of a desire, the desire of the French Presidency of the European Union, to reach an agreement, a sound agreement.
What is a sound agreement?
It is one that respects Community ideals and shows concern for the interests of all of the European Union' s regions.
I have, of course, listened to your concerns, which will indeed help us secure good terms of agreement with Morocco.
This is what we shall endeavour to do and it is along these lines that we intend to proceed and no other.
Mr President, I am going to ask a question, do not worry.
Anyway, allow me to say that Mr Fischler is neither Mediterranean nor is he from the Atlantic, and what is more we are unfortunate enough to have a Director-General for Fisheries who is from the north Atlantic and only learnt about fisheries problems when he was recently appointed to that post.
Thus the question I ask the Minister is as follows: the proposal we know about from Morocco would in principle seem to entail cutting the fleet from Galicia, Andalusia, the Canaries, and also Portugal, that fishes in Moroccan waters, down to 25% at least.
The agreement they propose is for two years instead of five, and in addition they want the European Union to pay them the ESP 21 billion that it is currently paying.
Allow me to say that the political will shown in practice - not in theory - by the Community negotiators has been absolutely nil, or in any case inadequate.
I must therefore express my scepticism about the result.
I ask the Minister: do you believe it is acceptable to negotiate the cuts I have mentioned and the continuing cost to the European Union of the agreement with Morocco?
. (FR) My comments as to this person' s Nordic or Mediterranean origins were made in response to a quip made by the President - it was a quip in itself.
The Commissioner for Agriculture, Rural Development and Fisheries acts on behalf of all of the European Union, irrespective of whether he comes from the north, south, east or west.
I can simply remind you how negotiations developed on the subject of fisheries.
Commissioner Fischler held several meetings with the highest authorities in Morocco.
Two technical meetings took place in Rabat on 25 July 2000 and in Brussels on 27 and 28 September 1999.
During these technical meetings, the Community delegation, headed by Director General Smith, put forward several initiatives that it envisaged as part of a new Fisheries Agreement with Morocco to aid the development of the Moroccan fisheries sector.
It also tried to set out a calendar for negotiations.
On this occasion, it must be said that Morocco did not respond to the offer made by the Community.
The impression that the negotiations had collapsed, which affected all of us, led Commissioner Fischler to call for another meeting with Prime Minister Youssoufi, to take place on 16 October 2000, where he met King Mohammed VI, Prime Minister Youssoufi and the new Minister for Fisheries, Mr Chbaatores.
These meetings seem to have revived the negotiation process and led to another meeting with a Moroccan delegation on 30 October 2000, therefore very recently.
This is why I think we must set a limit and not be overly optimistic, but neither do we have any reason to be unreasonably pessimistic.
Question No 13 by (H-0854/00):
Subject: Fundamental rights and criminal justice Is the Council aware that conditions of pre-trial detention of foreign truck-drivers arrested at ports on the English Channel commonly fail to comply with all the conditions laid down in the European Convention on Human Rights concerning arrest and concerning the right to a fair trial?
Is the Council aware of similar grave concern in relation to the Portuguese criminal justice system?
Will the Council therefore defer any proposals for mutual recognition of judgments in criminal matters until minimum human rights requirements are fully observed in all Member States?
Mr President, it is not the place of the Council to comment on behaviour observed on the territory of any Member State which contravenes the principles enunciated in the European Convention on Human Rights which each Member State has duly signed and ratified.
It is worth pointing out that the principle of the mutual recognition of criminal decisions, in accordance with the conclusions of the Tampere European Council, must make it possible to reinforce cooperation between Member States while at the same time reinforcing the protection of human rights.
The principle of the mutual recognition of criminal decisions presupposes the reciprocal confidence of Member States in their own criminal justice systems.
This confidence will depend specifically on setting minimum standards, especially in terms of procedure, which will have to be adopted as a precondition for the implementation of mutual recognition.
The European Union Member States have a shared commitment to the principles of freedom, democracy, respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms, as well as the rule of law.
It is by remaining attentive to these values enshrined in the Treaty on European Union that the Council will continue its work in the area of the mutual recognition of criminal decisions.
Mr President, I have on my desk a document which was presented to one of my constituents in Longuenesse jail in the north of France three months after his first detention there on suspicion of a drugs offence.
It is in French - no translation or interpretation was provided to the person in question.
He has now been in detention five months.
I have a letter from the sister of another constituent of mine who draws to my attention that he has been in prison since 28 March 2000 on similar suspicion.
No opportunity is given to such prisoners to choose their own lawyer.
They are given a defence lawyer.
The defence lawyer takes few opportunities to visit the persons or to explain the charges.
These are citizens from Scotland where after 110 days of detention any person charged with an offence must either be brought to trial or released and never again charged with that offence.
We do not have common standards of justice in the European Union and while we have such divergent standards and such total failure to meet the standards of Article 6 of the Convention on Human Rights, it is unacceptable to press ahead with the proposals of the Council.
. (FR) Yes, I simply wanted to say that it is precisely because we are sensitive to this issue that a programme of measures to implement the principle of mutual recognition of criminal decisions is possible.
That is what is at issue here.
Mr President, my point of order is that there remain twenty minutes of Question Time, there are very few Members in the House and there is no risk of exceeding time.
I ask you to give a ruling that two supplementaries may be allowed.
Supplementary questions must come from other Members.
According to the Rules of Procedure, you have reformulated your question.
Question No 14 by (H-0855/00):
Subject: EU's energy policy The Commissioner for Energy said recently that the energy issue in Europe was a national responsibility, not a Community one.
At the outset of discussions for the Intergovernmental Conference (1996/1997) there was a suggestion that special provisions should be incorporated into the Treaty of Amsterdam which would pave the way for the drafting of a common energy policy.
The suggestion was rejected by the 15 Member States, as was also the case for the Treaty of Maastricht.
There are, naturally, measures concerning energy (the White Paper, the SAVE programme, EUR 1 billion from the Fifth Research Programme, alternative energy etc.).
Despite all this, however, all the forecasts predict that the EU' s overall energy dependence (gas, oil, coal and uranium) will increase in the future.
Given that developments in the oil markets make it necessary for the EU to adopt a more dynamic policy in the energy sector, how does the Council think it might achieve a reduction in the European economy' s dependence on oil?
Have specific measures been taken (such as security of supplies and energy efficiency) to make the economies of the Member States less sensitive to external crises, and what are the Council' s methods and short-term and medium-term priorities for energy efficiency and energy saving?
The Council is aware of the growing importance of the European Union' s overall energy dependence and would remind the honourable Member of the Council conclusions of May 2000.
In this context, the Council attaches the greatest priority to pushing this work forward in the following areas: the promotion of renewable energy sources, energy efficiency, the security of energy supplies and the diversification of energy sources.
The competent bodies of the Council are currently working on a proposal to promote electricity from this renewable energy sources with a view to an agreement being reached at the next Council meeting in December, provided the European Parliament has given its opinion in due time.
As to energy efficiency, the Commission presented an action plan during last May' s Council meeting.
Based on this plan, next December the Council should be adopting conclusions containing a list of priority actions making it possible for the Commission to assess the areas where Member States would like to see Community measures or, alternatively, would prefer to confine themselves to coordinated action.
Furthermore, in the communication adopted on 4 October 2000 on the European Union' s oil supply, the Commission indicated that, at the European Council of Göteborg, it was planning to present a plan to save energy and to promote the diversification of energy sources, which should help to boost energy efficiency, especially in buildings and transport.
As regards the security of energy supplies, the Commission is planning to present a Green Paper, in November 2000, on the future and place of the different energy sources in the context of improving the security of the energy supply of the European Union.
This communication will tackle both nuclear energy and renewable energies.
Once it has been presented, the Council will certainly accord it the greatest priority.
What is more, the Presidency has convened a conference on the security of supplies for 24 November 2000 in Paris.
Mr President-in-Office of the Council, I will not conceal from you that my question was designed first and foremost to elicit a list of projects and a calendar from you.
You have presented these, and I thank you for that, but I also wanted to see if you could give us any information on, or your assessment of, whether the Council could perhaps progress towards closer cooperation, towards a sort of communitisation of energy policy given that, as we saw during the recent crisis, Member States are moving forward in a disorganised array and are competing amongst themselves in terms of both supplies and prices, and that the result for Europe as a whole is rather pathetic.
Nor will I conceal that I was looking for, perhaps, some ideas.
Some of my fellow Members have suggested an idea, which I too endorse, of investigating or drawing up plans towards, for example, a policy imposing the euro as the sole means of paying for oil in certain countries.
It is these questions above all which interest me and which, I think, are of special interest to all the citizens of Europe, because this dependence is not just quantitative but also economic and financial.
These are indeed very interesting suggestions which merit a debate, but I cannot give you an answer on behalf of the Council right now.
Regarding energy issues in general, I do believe that we must look into presenting more of a united front, since we should at least have a coordinated approach to these problems within the European Union.
Question No 15 by (H-0858/00):
Subject: New US bill enforcing embargo on Cuba A new bill being voted on in the USA has given rise to a storm of protest both in Cuba and in European.
On the pretext of lifting the ban on sales from the USA to Cuba of primary necessities, medicines and medical equipment , the embargo is being considerably intensified and obstacles to trade are multiplying in the form of tighter restrictions on Americans travelling to Cuba, provisions - which are contrary to international trade rules - preventing US organisations and banks from financing sales, requiring guarantees by third countries or payment in cash.
What steps will the Council take to stop the adoption of this US bill, which is in breach of international trade rules, and what action will it take to secure the total lifting of the embargo on Cuba and the restoration of normal trade relations between Cuba and all other countries, in particular the Member States of the European Union?
The measures to which the honourable Member is referring appear in the draft budget signed by President Clinton on 28 October 2000.
The position of the European Union on the extra-territorial measures decreed by the United States has not changed.
I believe it is well known to the Members of the European Parliament, and the European Union seizes every opportunity to remind the United States of it.
However, it must be regretfully pointed out that the US Government has not yet taken any action regarding its own commitments under the agreement concluded at the London Summit in May 1998.
We call on the US Government to do so, as we believe this is essential in resolving this dispute.
The objective of the European Union regarding Cuba, as established in the common position on Cuba adopted by the Council on 2 December 1996, is to encourage a process of peaceful "transition to pluralist democracy and respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms, as well as a sustainable recovery and improvement in the living standards of the Cuban people."
Encouraging the Cuban regime to bring Cuban legislation and its application into line with international standards also falls within this objective.
In the same vein, at the time of the vote on the resolution on the embargo as part of the Third Commission of the General Assembly of the United Nations which met on 9 November 2000, we launched an appeal to the Cuban authorities to cooperate fully with international organisations defending human rights.
The European Union notes with satisfaction that Cuba has continued to be very active in various international and regional forums.
It also recognises that measures have been taken by the Cuban Government to better integrate the country into the region economically.
The European Union notes the need for a progressive and irreversible opening of the Cuban economy towards the outside world and reaffirms its wish to be Cuba' s partner in this process.
Finally, it is with concern that the European Union takes note of the findings of the United Nations' agencies and programmes on the ground.
It deplores the negative, and often tragic, repercussions of the US economic embargo as they affect the Cuban population, especially women and children.
Mr President-in-Office, thank you for your reply.
I note that your reply contained certain comments on the lack of respect in Cuba for human rights and fundamental freedoms.
You, of course, suspect that I do not agree with that view; be that as it may, I consider that this sort of judgment constitutes interference in the internal affairs of a country.
And, the way in which you phrased your position gives me cause to wonder if, in the final analysis, there is any difference between the ultimate aim of the policy of the European Union on Cuba and the ultimate aim of American policy on Cuba.
It seems to me that both seek to overturn the Socialist regime in Cuba.
It is curious what interpreting problems there can be, as I do not feel that is what I said at all.
I recalled the very clear differences between the United States and Europe regarding the extra-territorial measures decreed by the United States.
I noted with satisfaction, on behalf of the Council, that Cuba had continued to be very active in various international and regional forums.
I recognised that measures had been taken by the Cuban Government to better integrate their country economically into the region and reaffirmed Europe' s willingness to be Cuba' s partner in this process.
Finally, I recalled that it was with concern that the European Union took note of the observations made by the United Nations' agencies and programmes on the ground and deplored the negative, and often tragic, repercussions of the US economic embargo as they affected the Cuban population.
So I, in fact, said practically the opposite of what you have just said.
At the same time, I must remind you of the European Union' s position towards Cuba as established by the Council on 2 December 1996, which is to encourage a process of peaceful transition towards pluralist democracy and respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms, as well as a sustainable recovery and improvement in the living standards of the Cuban people.
No position has been taken in relation to the nature of the regime, but the regime has perhaps been given a certain amount of encouragement or incentive to move its practices forward.
If you do not see the difference between that and any other position, then perhaps there is a degree of misunderstanding, possibly intentional.
Question No 16 by (H-0859/00):
Subject: Violation by Turkey of sovereign rights within NATO Turkey has, de facto, challenged the sovereign rights of Greece by intercepting Greek aircraft taking part in NATO's exercise, Destined Glory, its failure to respect the Greek ten-mile FIR and the air corridors over the islands of Limnos and Ikaria, ignoring the opinions of NATO's legal service, and departing from the plans for the exercise drawn up by NATO's administration, which prompted the Greek Government to withdraw its troops.
What view does the Council take of this challenge to the sovereign rights of an EU Member State within NATO?
Does it intend to make representations to the Turkish authorities to put an end to such acts of provocation, and what form will those representations take?
What consequences will these acts have for relations between the EU and Turkey, particularly in the context of the common foreign and security policy, given Turkey's status as an applicant for accession?
Regarding the incident involving the Greek and Turkish aircraft taking part in the Destined Glory exercise, it must be pointed out that this incident took place during a NATO exercise between two members of the North Atlantic Alliance.
It is therefore up to NATO to take the steps it deems necessary to prevent further accidents of this kind.
This case has not, in any case, been brought up in the Council of the European Union.
On the substance of the disputes between Turkey and Greece in the Aegean Sea, the Council recalls the conclusions of the Helsinki European Council which stress the principle of the peaceful settlement of disputes in accordance with the United Nations Charter and which insistently call on applicant countries to make every effort to settle any border disputes and any other disputes of a similar nature.
Failing that, they should take their disputes to the Court of Justice within a reasonable period.
By the end of 2004 at the latest, the European Council will take stock of the situation regarding any outstanding disputes, especially with regard to their implications for the accession process and so as to promote their settlement through the International Court of Justice.
More generally, issues relating to the settlement of the disputes between Greece and Turkey are included in the reinforced policy dialogue in the context of Turkey' s pre-accession strategy and the accession partnership the Commission has just proposed and which the French Presidency - as I can confirm - hopes will be adopted quickly.
Moreover, the Council is gratified that, at their meeting in Budapest on 31 October, the Turkish and Greek Foreign Ministers agreed to adopt confidence building measures in the context of NATO, and to do so bilaterally.
Mr President, first we find it unacceptable, as the President-in-Office said, that the Greek Government has not raised the matter in the Council, despite the justified outcry in Greece.
Secondly, the Council refers in its reply to NATO as Pontius Pilate, without taking a position on Turkey's provocation in contesting Greek sovereign rights, on this occasion during NATO exercises.
Does the Council not understand that this is a supremely political problem and that it is unacceptable for it to maintain a position which is equidistant from both the offender and the victim?
Similarly, it is a fact that Turkey contests the Greek ten-mile FIR and the air corridors over the islands of Limnos and Ikaria, both of which are regulated by the Lausanne and Montreux conventions and in intergovernmental agreements between Turkey and Italy and Italy and Greece.
Thirdly, it does not take account of the fact that NATO's legal service issued an opinion upholding Greece's aforementioned rights in accordance with international conventions, even though, under pressure from Turkey, NATO changed its exercise at the last minute. NATO's legal service, no less!
Fourthly and finally, does he not think that his reply is an encouragement to Turkey, a candidate country for membership of the European Union, to continue its present policy of contesting the sovereign rights of Greece, a member of the European Union and that he has therefore indirectly admitted that there are border disputes which must be resolved, as we have said, on the basis of international conventions?
I outlined what action Council had or had not taken, and what it had to do or believed it had to do.
As for the rest, I believe that we now have a framework for dealing with these particular problems, to wit, the Helsinki Council conclusions.
I would point out that these conclusions are our common rule as, obviously, they were adopted unanimously by all the Member States.
That is the mandate the Council has given itself for the next phase in the examination of this candidacy, which has already been discussed at length and in detail today.
I must inform you, ladies and gentlemen - even though there are very few of you I am going to make this solemn statement - that for the first time in the legislature we have had time to get through all the questions.
I do not know if it was to everyone' s satisfaction, but it is an almost historic event of which we take good note.
That concludes Questions to the Council.
(The sitting was suspended at 6.55 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m.)
Aid for reconstruction (continuation)
The next item is the continuation of the joint debate on aid for reconstruction.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, the Commission should start by applying the Feira conclusions to its proposals.
All of us in the European Union who supposedly have a position of responsibility face a huge challenge.
I think we have an historic chance today to prove that our acts are tantamount to a declaration of good intentions towards the western Balkans.
The sums budgeted for the Balkans should put us in mind, in terms of quality and quantity, of a new Marshall plan and should act as a springboard to a new beginning in the countries of the western Balkans.
Nor should we forget that the countries of the western Balkans are not third countries, they are candidate countries for membership of the European Union and we must treat them as such.
It is true that the European Union is often accused of promising aid to countries struck by disaster or catastrophe and then taking so long to pay it, so long to keep its financial promises that either it creates the impression that it regrets having promised it in the first place or, when it finally does pay, it is already too late.
Luckily, there is a shining exception to this rule, and it really is a rule.
The exception is the Reconstruction Agency which has its headquarters in Thessaloniki and an operational centre in Kosovo.
This agency complies with the Commission's decision on decentralisation and is exceptionally efficient in managing the project for which it is responsible.
It has already signed contracts for 90% of the budget for 2000, which is truly amazing.
It has already disbursed approximately 30% of the appropriations for 2000.
Plus, and this is unprecedented, it has requested a reduction in wage costs.
I therefore propose, that not only should we leave these people in peace to get on with their job with the gusto and enthusiasm which they have shown so far, not only should we refrain from upsetting the modus operandi of the agency, although we should, of course, make it responsible for the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and anywhere else it is needed, but we should also ask them to pass their know-how on to other committees whose work, as we all know, is so abysmal, so inefficient and brings in such poor results.
I trust that we can use these opinions to do more for this region in which hardship and suffering abound.
Commissioner and the few honourable Members who have found their way here, I must, of course, start by congratulating the rapporteurs on their work and excellent cooperation, especially the rapporteur who is here in the House.
The previous speaker spoke of a sort of Marshall plan for this region and rightly so, I think.
It is the prerogative of those handing out money to stipulate the political objectives and the Commissioner has done so on several occasions.
Nonetheless, I should like briefly to outline them once again today on behalf of my group.
First, we still have a situation in this region, more's the pity, in which human rights and minority rights are not properly respected.
That is now a fact.
Our first objective, therefore, must be to help where we can and where we see that there is the will to take better account of minority and human rights in the future.
Secondly, international agreements are being challenged in this region over and over again, including recently the Dayton agreement.
If I think back to the election campaign in Bosnia-Herzegovina, one of the saddest side-effects of the election process was that leading politicians distanced themselves from Dayton, not in the sense of saying they wanted to go further and wanted more stability, but in the sense of destabilisation.
Here we must say an unequivocal 'no' .
Respect for international agreements - including in connection with Dayton - obviously includes cooperation with the War Crimes Tribunal in the Hague.
We must act decisively - albeit with a certain degree of tolerance - both towards Kostunica, whom we shall be receiving here tomorrow, and the new Yugoslav authorities.
There are a few positive signs, but certainly not enough.
Thirdly, there must be no unilateral changes to borders.
That applies to both Montenegro and Kosovo.
Here too, we must be clear and unequivocal.
We must give the new Yugoslavia a chance. I hope it will grab that chance.
I am not excluding border changes, but I am quite definitely excluding unilateral border changes, whichever side makes them.
Any such changes must be set out in an agreement.
Fourthly, and most importantly for us, new borders are being erected but they are no obstacle to the activities of criminal organisations, which know no borders.
We must combat illegal cross-border activities, be they in connection with the drug trade, cross-border cooperation or trafficking in human beings.
Borders are there to be dismantled, but not by criminals and, unfortunately, they are more active here than in other regions.
These are the objectives we need to achieve with the funds and instruments which we are now creating.
I think that the Commission and Council are also keen for us to work consistently with the means at our disposal over coming years to achieve these objectives.
But where there is no will, nor should there be money from us.
Mr President, Mr Kostunica, the new President of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, will be addressing the House tomorrow.
His symbolic presence here could open up prospects for the overall policy which we are pursuing.
My second comment is that the previous speakers complained that the European Union pays, but the US is listened to.
That is only logical because the US has engaged in political acts in Bosnia with the Dayton agreement and the US has again engaged in political acts in Kosovo with the initiative which it took on the bombings and much else besides.
What does that mean for us?
That policy must come first or must at least move in parallel if it is to have political objectives.
What should these political objectives be?
Obviously, institutional aspects and the proper working of democracy take priority in the region as a whole.
If democracy is working properly it will create the preconditions to respect for minorities in the various regions.
If democracy is working properly, it will help the region to run smoothly.
However, it must also be based on individuals.
We must admit that, on numerous occasions, the individuals serving a number of purposes during the transitional phase were not a healthy expression of political life in the region.
In this sense, we need to review our perception of individuals, facts and situations.
The second issue which I would like to touch on concerns the strategy in the region.
Quite clearly, uniting political prospects with economic and institutional prospects is a positive development.
However, if positive developments are to have good results, they need a strategic framework and a strategic aspect.
From this point of view, I think that resurrecting an issue which was resolved about a year ago with the Pack report as far as the headquarters of the Reconstruction Agency is concerned is a disservice.
It would be a good idea for Commissioner Patten, who has a great deal of experience - not to say wisdom - in managing international crises, to add to the visits which he has made to various regions of the Balkans by going to the headquarters of the Reconstruction Agency in Thessaloniki in order to see how this department works.
In this sense, I endorse and repeat everything which Mr Folias just said.
Anyway, enough of the bad news, now to the good news.
The Lagendijk report, apart from the criticism which I may have levied at one point, is an excellent text, as is the Commission proposal.
They create a framework for political initiatives which must be built up into new perceptions.
We must look on this region as a region of Europe and not as a region of antagonism between the countries and the national policies of Europe or America.
If we treat the area as a region of political antagonism we shall be making a big mistake.
In all events, I think that we are on the right track.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to start by thanking the rapporteurs for the excellent reports which they have tabled today.
The message sent by Parliament through these documents comes across loud and clear.
It is my hope that the Commission and the Council will accept it with due interest and amend the two regulations accordingly.
We are all aware of the importance of European Union aid for the Balkan region.
The re-establishment of a democratic political system in Serbia is the start of a new chapter in history, but the Union must be the protagonist of this new phase rather than the passive, slothful observer which it has been thus far.
Our technical and economic intervention must be large-scale and effective, for this is the very least the Union can do to give the region and the continent as a whole a stable future.
We must bear in mind that there is still a long way to go along the road to peace in the Balkans and that potential friction points still exist which could well set the whole process back again.
But this region, the most troubled region of Europe, has never held such hope as it does now.
The virtually despotic Croatian system has been replaced with a pro-West democratic system.
The vulnerable countries surrounding the remains of Yugoslavia have weathered the crisis, and, what is more, Bulgaria, Albania and Macedonia have even made economic progress.
In the fine changes of balance currently governing the Balkan region, the responsibility of the European Union is great, enormous, and when we say the Union we mean the Member States but also the European and Parliament.
The Member States make grandiose declarations of their intentions but these must be followed by a concrete financial undertaking.
The European Commission must assume responsibility for the smooth running of these programmes, and this is the primary objective of the two reports which are to be put to the vote tomorrow.
Parliament must be regularly consulted and updated on progress, and it is this, the second of the rapporteurs' requests, which we must all support.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, in the texts before us, the Commission and Parliament have put a figure of EUR 4 billion on the war damage caused by the NATO bombings in Serbia alone, excluding Kosovo, thereby indirectly admitting that they were to blame for some of the material war crimes.
NATO professes to have intervened in order to prevent further suffering, and yet there were far more exiles, dead and wounded as a result of this war than there had been in the 12 allegedly decisive months before NATO intervened militarily.
Surely the region was not effectively destabilised until NATO waged war on it?
In the end, the intervention by NATO in the Balkans served to legitimise the NATO strategy and its so-called self-imposed mandate.
In recognition of the war damage caused and the fact that the situation was escalated by NATO, payments should be equal to not half but all the quantified war damage.
More importantly, instead of lending money, the EU - and in particular the Member States which belong to NATO - should pay reparation for the damage which they caused.
Thank you Commissioner.
The joint debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 p.m.
ASEM III
The next item is the Commission statement on the third Asia-Europe Meeting (ASEM III, Seoul, 20-21 October 2000).
Mr President, let me engage in a bit of continent hopping.
Before reporting on the third ASEM summit and evaluating its results, let me briefly say a word about the ASEM process.
The first summit in 1996 was at a time of huge optimism about Asia when people were talking about the Asian economic miracle.
The second summit, in 1998, came at a time of economic crisis when many people were saying that Asia had had it and all had been much exaggerated.
We saw some reality at the third summit.
There was not an Asian economic miracle but a great deal that is very exciting has happened in Asia and it has recovered very rapidly in most parts from the crisis of 1997/98.
Where it has done so most successfully, it has managed it by combining economic and political reform.
That has been the background to these summits.
The challenge for the third summit in Seoul was to deepen the ASEM process both for governmental participants and for the broader public.
It had to demonstrate that there need not be dramatic events occurring to justify meetings of European and Asian Heads of State or Government.
We outlined our goals for ASEM III in our working party, we discussed it with the European Parliament before the summit on two occasions in the ASEAN working party and in the plenary which resulted, I believe, in your resolution of 5 October, the aims of which we not only took into account, but also managed to achieve in most cases.
In addition to adopting three important documents, the leaders of the summit actively engaged in discussion of sensitive issues like human rights, the South China Sea, East Timor and Burma.
They pledged to promote and protect fundamental human rights and uphold respect for democracy, the rule of law, equality, justice and concern for the environment.
It was agreed to intensify ASEM's high level political dialogue by drawing strength from the diversity of Members while not excluding any issue.
Leaders agreed to an expanded and updated Asia-Europe cooperation framework 2000 which forms the work programme for the coming decade.
The need for common efforts to implement the Kyoto Protocol was confirmed, a consumer-producer dialogue to stabilise world prices for oil was advocated as well as closer cooperation to develop energy saving technologies.
Trans-national crime was discussed, the exploitation of migrants, people trafficking, the fight against illegal drugs, all those issues which, alas, form the darkest side of globalisation.
The summit adopted the separate Seoul declaration for peace on the Korean peninsula, welcoming the inter-Korean summit in June, urging both sides to continue building on its success and underlining the importance of engaging the Democratic People's Republic of Korea in multilateral dialogue.
On enlargement, the two-key approach was adopted whereby a candidate country first needs the support of its regional partners before seeking endorsement from the other region.
The final decision is made by consensus, by Heads of State or Government.
No specific candidates were discussed at ASEM III.
In the field of economic and financial cooperation, leaders agreed to work together to address the challenges posed by globalisation, information technology, e-commerce and the digital divide by expanding research and information networks between the two regions.
Leaders also confirmed the preparation of voluntary annual reports on the status of efforts to overcome barriers to trade as identified under the trade facilitation action plan.
There was an acceptance by all ASEM partners to work towards a new comprehensive WTO round as soon as possible, taking into account the special needs of developing countries.
In the social and cultural field, leaders recognised the vital importance of better educational links with specific initiatives for promoting mutual awareness, including an enhancement of inter-university cooperation and electronic networking between schools.
In the related people-to-people field, the principle of opening the ASEM process to a larger segment of civil society was maintained, although the NGO initiative to establish a social forum could not be realised because of the resistance of certain Asian partners.
I am sure Parliament can see these results are in line with the resolution of 5 October which I mentioned earlier.
Human rights and the rule of law are embedded in the process; there was a clear understanding of the need for the early start of a broad-based WTO round but I am not sure that has been entirely reflected so far at the discussions at the APEC meetings in Brunei.
While the proposal to establish a social forum was not accepted, we actively engaged with civil society and the NGOs and I very much hope that this area will see further progress in the run-up to ASEM IV in Copenhagen.
Finally, leaders agreed to encourage an intensification of contacts among parliamentarians as set out in the cooperation framework.
Inevitably, ASEM III was dominated by the momentous developments on the Korean peninsula which have resulted in the very worthy nomination for the Nobel Peace Prize of the President of South Korea, a man whose career has been distinguished, both by his commitment to democracy and human rights and the rule of law and, most recently, to his commitment to reconciliation between the south and north of the peninsula.
I think that reminded us in Europe of the important role that we have in Asia, not just in economic and trade terms, though it has to be said that one of the reasons for Asia's recovery has been that we have kept our word to keep our markets open to Asian exports over the last two years.
This year it seems very likely that China will have a surplus of EUR 40 billion with the European Union.
We have kept our word in economic and commercial matters which, among other things, encourages Asia to take us rather more seriously.
It is important to remember that we also have a political role in Asia, not just in our advocacy of democracy and good governance, but also in the contribution we can make in the Korean peninsula and elsewhere to stability and security for the future.
The ASEM process is an important one.
This was a very valuable meeting.
The process is developing and strengthening with time and I look forward to the next ASEM meeting in Denmark in a couple of years' time when I am sure we will be able to build on the progress already achieved.
Mr President, Commissioner, I think the House is so empty because we have proceeded apace this evening and some members who wished to speak have not yet arrived and are still dining.
I would ask you, therefore, not to interpret the low turnout as an indication that the issue is not important.
Commissioner, first I agree with your reading that the ASEM process is hugely important.
It is of huge political and economic significance.
I only wish that both this House and many of your colleagues in the Commission would see the importance of Asia's relations with Europe from the right perspective, and that includes the Union's fisheries policy - may my Spanish colleagues forgive me and with my excuses to Mr Fischler.
If you take a long-term view of political and economic developments in our multi-polar world, then you will see that Asia's relations with Europe, and vice versa, are of paramount importance.
In this respect we are extremely lucky that the summit in Seoul took place at all and that, with one or two exceptions, all the heads of government attended.
That was highly significant.
You are quite right that the Asian Summit was somewhat dominated, in the positive sense, by developments in both North and South Korea, with the result that more time was spent evaluating and qualifying the rapprochement on the Korean peninsular than on a real in-depth discussion of the Asia process.
But we should be pleased that positive developments are taking place there.
Allow me, however, to comment on the poor Council representative who will have to write up his protocol at some point: obviously the situation was awkward in Seoul due to the fact that some EU Member States have stopped exchanging ambassadors with North Korea and others have not.
It would have been smarter - if we are to have a common foreign and security policy - if all 15 Member States had taken a joint decision to resume relations with North Korea at the same time and on the same terms, as opposed to this display of showmanship by some Heads of State and Government.
It is good - I freely admit - that some agreement was reached on a framework programme for cooperation between Asia and Europe.
But, Commissioner, have you in all honesty understood the substance of the framework agreement?
I still have a great deal of difficulty really understanding the substance of what has been agreed for the next decade.
And here I think that, what is important to Parliament - even if only a few of us are here, someone should read the protocol and we specialists will take it from there - is for it to be involved in the process of putting flesh on the bones of the framework for cooperation between Asia and Europe.
I think, in any case, that Parliament conducts itself far too reactively.
As we have such a good negotiating partner in you, Commissioner, we should try to agree on the content before Copenhagen and before the conferences and Parliament should start us thinking about how we can flesh out the framework which you have decided on.
I am delighted that the European side took a clear stance on human rights.
But we need to discuss the consequences of what that means at our leisure.
I think it was an excellent political declaration but we still have a few problems here.
I think that it is our job here in Parliament to follow up on what the European side generously included in the conclusions, namely cooperation between the European Parliament and the parliaments of the countries in Asia, following the first ASEM conference held in Strasbourg a few years ago.
It is an important task and I can only hope that Parliament will initiate the second meeting next year before Copenhagen.
We should arrange to hold it in Asia, given that the last meeting was held in Strasbourg.
It is when you look at cooperation between Asia and Europe from the point of view of democracy or human rights that you see how important it is for us to cooperate more closely with parliaments in the Asian countries and bring about positive developments.
Mr Jarzembowski, with regard to your remark about the extremely low attendance, if we count the Commissioner, we can say that 75 percent of the speakers are present.
That is really not bad!
Mr President, we talked about this issue a month ago and had an excellent discussion with the Commissioner.
We were all agog.
Naturally we welcome the fact that the process has been opened up to North Korea.
It is just a shame that we have not seen fit to make the necessary funds available to go with it.
Apart from that, we feel the outcome left a lot to be desired, and that is putting it mildly.
What we dislike about ASEM II is not so much what we have managed to achieve, because projects to do with money-laundering, HIV and AIDS, food safety and suchlike, are of course to be welcomed.
In fact two concrete proposals have been adopted, notably the round table on globalisation and the duo fellowship programme, 4300 fellowships amounting to a total cost of USD 25 million.
That is not to be sniffed at of course, but there are still a few questions we would like answered.
I will return to them in due course.
What is more important is what was not adopted.
We could have done so much more in terms of financial stability, trade and investments, and infrastructure.
An ASEM environmental centre was proposed.
Now that would have been something.
What concerns us is what we failed to do on the human rights front.
Things were said but they have not found their way into the projects that were agreed, not even in terms of the considerable reserve, for example, although this could easily have been done.
In any case, this considerable reserve also has something to do with globalisation.
We agreed to concentrate on globalisation, in particular the adverse effects thereof, when in fact we believe that globalisation is a positive force.
There is a down side but surely we should also consider the bonuses.
We find it incomprehensible that the secretariat for the fellowship programme is to be located in Seoul.
ASEF is working extremely well in Singapore, so why not establish it there?
We know that the Commission values ASEM extremely highly and it has our wholehearted support on that score.
What we want to know is whether our Ministers have given ASEM due consideration.
We feel they have been sadly lacking in ambition and are therefore unworthy of praise.
Some headway has been made in terms of Asia-Europe parliamentary dialogue.
Perhaps we parliamentarians can succeed where Ministers have failed in this respect.
The European Commission deserves our support because we are convinced it is going about things the right way.
That said, we feel the Ministers ought to have been able to achieve a much better result.
I have received seven motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 37(2) of the Rules of Procedure.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place on Thursday.
Regional Fisheries Organisations (RFOs)
The next item is the report (A5-0275/2000) tabled by Mr Jové Peres, on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries, on the Commission Communication to the Council and the European Parliament: Community participation in Regional Fisheries Organisations (RFOs) [COM(1999) 613 - C5-0108/2000 - 2000/2068(COS)].
Commissioner, the regional fisheries organisations are becoming increasingly important, particularly in fishing grounds with shared sovereignty or in the management of migratory or straddling stocks.
As they are adapted to the specific characteristics of their areas, they are a particularly appropriate instrument for the rational management of resources.
It is therefore a matter of priority that the European Union should equip itself with the machinery needed to ensure the full participation it deserves.
The Commission' s communication confines itself to dealing with those aspects relating to the powers of the Community and Member States in tasks arising from their participation in those organisations.
This approach is necessary but inadequate, since the European Union needs to adopt clear, uniform and homogeneous guidelines for its participation in the regional fisheries organisations. In view of the diverse nature of the existing regional organisations, the Community's participation in each of them must be suited to their individual characteristics.
It must, however, obey the same basic principles from a legal and institutional point of view. Therefore the report by the parliamentary Committee on Fisheries advocates sharing tasks evenly between the Community and the Member States with regard to the regional fisheries organisations as a whole.
The leading role in the Community' s action should be played by the Commission, the guardian of Community interests, but it should not only deal with the representative role to which it seems hitherto to have confined itself through lack of resources.
In future the Commission must not confine itself to being a mere figurehead: it must unequivocally and specifically take up all aspects of the Community's participation in these regional organisations, representing it, monitoring the transmission and verification of data, participating in scientific fora, and in general guiding Community action, including monitoring the fishing carried out in the context of these organisations.
The monitoring of fisheries affects the jurisdiction of the Member States and hence to a certain extent the core of their sovereignty.
This monitoring should be transferred to an unequivocally Community body, so that the common fisheries policy can apply to all Member States and to all vessels and crews regardless of their nationality, thus avoiding any possible breach of the principle of equal treatment.
The administration of monitoring and, progressively, its actual execution must therefore be assigned to the Commission, and hence the cost of this must be borne by the Community budget.
The existing machinery for transposing rules into Community law needs to be improved in order to increase legal certainty and to overcome its current sluggishness.
But faster transposition into Community law of the rules adopted within the regional organisations does not exempt the Council and Parliament from doing their job of steering the Community fisheries policy.
In view of the growing importance of the regional fisheries organisations (RFO), the European Union must fully exercise its powers in fisheries matters, but this raises a problem above all of human and material resources.
Perhaps to side-step the problem of resources, the Commission has decided to propose a reformulation of the duties to be performed by the Community and the Member States, without modifying their respective competences.
Although this approach might be acceptable as a temporary measure, it could cause serious regulatory and, above all, institutional problems if it were made permanent.
The distribution of tasks proposed by the Commission would assign 'high-level' representation to the Community and delegate representation on scientific and technical committees to the Member States. Contributing to the work of the RFOs would also be entrusted to the Member States, as would inspection and monitoring tasks.
This means that the Community's role as a contracting party would be reduced to a mere façade.
European integration cannot be confined to declarations without any tangible content.
While there is a common fisheries policy and the Community has powers in the sphere of fisheries it must equip itself with the human and material resources needed to tackle its obligations, as required by the principle of adequacy of resources inherent in the common fisheries policy.
Similarly, if the Community is a contracting party in the RFOs, it must behave accordingly and perform the role required of it.
The implementation of this principle has financial implications and requires legal changes and, possibly, sacrificing a certain amount of sovereignty; but if a particular model of political integration is chosen the means must be provided for that model to be put into practice.
Mr President, the regional fisheries organisations are today without doubt the best, if not the only, guarantee for the management of world fish stocks, and they are likely be even more significant in the future.
The rapporteur has understood their importance perfectly and has drawn up an excellent report, which highlights the real weakness of the communication.
Very good intentions which can only become reality if there is a genuine political desire.
When we think that, of all the coastal countries in the world, very few have the economic, judicial, legislative and political potential that the European Union has, that should tell us how much we should be asking ourselves what our responsibility is.
Yet the Community neither gets involved nor takes a lead; the very most it does is react.
But it reacts with such paltry means and so little foresight that in the end it is like sending David out against Goliath. Except that in the Bible David won, which is not the case here.
I have been an observer in some regional organisations and I can assure you that it is pathetic to see two or three mid-ranking officials, exhausted and hardly getting any sleep, trying to react to problems that could be seen coming months earlier and facing high-powered delegations, which are high-powered either because they are from great powers like the United States or Japan or because they have followed an intelligent policy of forming alliances in advance.
As the Directorate-General for Fisheries is currently being restructured and may gain more staff and better resources, I believe we should demand that priority be given to strengthening this area.
It would mean, first of all, not having to confine itself to reacting to actions like that of the Galapagos Agreement and its manifest intention of unilaterally extending the jurisdictional waters of four countries in defiance of the basic norms of international maritime law, or against attempts to arbitrarily expel Community fleets, which are among the few that are governed by strict standards and regulations.
Similarly, the Commission has the obligation not only to properly represent us in the international maritime sphere but also to take the initiative.
It should thus promote the setting-up of new regional organisations, beginning where the Community already has a presence, such as in the western Pacific and south Pacific.
In view of the expected restructuring, I should like to ask specifically for a unit to be set up for large migratory species, the need for which has already been noted by the Commission insofar as it has drawn up a number of regulations just for these species, which are the main target for flags of convenience, a pirate scourge that inexplicably is spreading ever more widely.
In conclusion, I reiterate my support for the rapporteur' s magnificent report.
Mr President, I thank the rapporteur and the Commissioner.
The regional fisheries organisations and the Community's participation in them is an important issue.
Covering nearly all the high seas these organisations provide an instrument to ensure active conservation and management of the fisheries resource.
It is this precious resource that I should like to turn to.
We face a depletion of stocks already which puts fishing into a crisis situation.
There is over-fishing, pollution of our seas, the climate is changing - we see that at the conference at the Hague at the moment - and the physical alteration of the environment puts increasing pressure on these finite resources.
Reform of the CFP will be critical but getting the right reforms will be even more important.
In Scotland the Scottish Fishermen's Federation and the World Wildlife Fund have got together to propose the concept of zonal regional management.
The fisheries management scheme would involve all interest groups in a particular region.
Although initially merely advisory in its recommendations, it is hoped that by illustrating efficiency and effectiveness over time it would earn a management role.
The development of a regionalisation of the CFP will be critical in ensuring local action.
Regional fisheries organisations provided a role on an international scale and regional or zonal management can make the global become local.
It will truly make for sustainable fisheries.
Mr President, I have only one minute in which to express my support for Mr Jové' s excellent report, which deals very accurately with an aspect of the common fisheries policy that has not been recognised within the Union as a fundamental part of the policy.
Because Europe' s Member States are obsessed with disputes in Community waters, they forget, in practical terms, that fishing has a worldwide dimension, in terms of both the conservation of marine stocks and production and also the markets and the nature of the fleets.
As a result, some countries in the Union, such as Galicia, which I represent, are affected particularly badly by this situation and by the consequent lack of human and material resources afflicting the European Commission in its implementation of the common policy for regional fishing organisations.
The rapporteur rightly criticises these shortcomings and has proposed highly appropriate solutions, with which we agree.
Mr President, Commissioner, as we now all know, the state of fish stocks is a cause for concern throughout the world.
As we have just heard, part of the problem is extensive environmental pollution, such as the recent tanker accidents and, let us face it, there is no shortage of tanker accidents nowadays.
However, the main reason is overexploitation of fish stocks due to the huge catching capacity of the fishing fleets.
For the sake of the environment, and fishermen, we must aim to achieve sustainable management of fish resources.
However, if we are to achieve this objective, the Community still has a few important steps to take.
And time is running out.
In its communication to the Council and Parliament, the Commission criticises the lack of uniform regulations governing fisheries within and beyond exclusive economic zones.
The law of the survival of the fittest still applies on the high seas.
This law is based on the overriding principle of the freedom of the high seas.
The sea knows no borders.
There is hardly a fish in it which is permanently domiciled.
I am referring here to all migratory fish stocks.
Any over-fishing has a domino effect, and careful handling of fish resources is a pointless exercise if everyone else is ruthlessly pursuing their own economic interests and paying no heed whatsoever to the need to protect stocks.
The EU has the fourth largest fishing capacity in the world.
However, its importance does not give it the right to take measures at its own convenience and any measures taken must be in keeping with its international obligations.
It is because of this global perspective that international collaboration is needed and, to be sure, the most important committees - and this brings us back to the basis for collaboration - are made up mainly of regional fisheries organisations.
It is not just since the 1995 New York Agreement that their importance has been recognised; basically they are the best way of fostering responsible fishing.
They alone are able to implement supra-regional regulations in keeping with local conditions.
They carry out statistical programmes and are responsible for inspections and the monitoring system.
They are the most efficient way of ensuring that rules are not ignored.
Given the importance of regional fisheries organisations to sustainable fishing, it is imperative that the EU be granted a seat in every regional fisheries organisation.
That way we can be sure that we will all end up pulling in the same direction.
(ES) Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, as I am about to leave for one of these regional fisheries organisations in Marrakech, where I am due to arrive the day after tomorrow to take part as an observer for this Parliament, on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries, I should like to take part in this debate on our colleague Salvador Jové' s magnificent report, in which the position of our committee is made quite clear.
We are backing the regional fisheries organisations; we are asking for more regional fisheries organisations and for the Commission to have more weight in them.
When we say more organisations, we mean those that can and should be set up in the South Atlantic or South Pacific - as has already been said here - and for the Commission to take a leading role in them.
I believe the future of fishing in international waters depends on these organisations, and the Commission must make every possible effort, Commissioner, to this end.
To support the United Nations position in both the 1982 Convention and the New York one, which has been mentioned here, we must maintain a very active presence in these organisations in favour of responsible fishing.
You can count on the support of this Parliament' s Committee on Fisheries, including our support for acquiring more material and human resources, which, as has been shown, are much needed.
We are a budgetary authority and I believe we should fund this line, because in these organisations and in these waters we are staking a lot on the future of fisheries in the coming years.
I want, therefore, to stress that the opinion of Parliament is practically unanimous, and so the Commission should realise that we are allies in this constructive endeavour to give the Commission greater weight - more staff, as we have said.
In comparison with other nations the European Union representation is clearly small, so we have to have more and better representation, Mr Fischler.
Let me say that we are going to continue this strategy of calling you before our committee in advance to inform us of the positions that you intend to advocate.
We shall do so together with the fishing sector so that we can form a common, joint opinion Then you will have to return to the parliamentary committee for the Commission to report back to us.
I should like to close, Mr President, by once again congratulating our rapporteur, Mr Jové, for the magnificent report he has drawn up.
Could I first of all take the opportunity to welcome the report and say that the whole issue of the management, control and the conservation of fisheries stocks is a major problem no matter where you look.
Throughout the European Union and far beyond we are all well aware of that.
It has also been the source of tremendous disagreement between the fishermen, on one hand, and the scientists, on the other.
To some extent, those of us who are politicians find ourselves in the middle.
We are neither fishermen nor scientists and we try to find the way and the truth between what both are saying to us.
This is an extremely difficult position to have to try to find a way through.
What I would say to this House and to the Commissioner is that we need information of the highest quality and the highest standard that we can all, scientists, fishermen or politicians, take on board.
That is why I believe there is a tremendous role for the Commission to play in going out there and encouraging the fishermen to come forward and cooperate with it and come forward with a solution that we can all agree to.
The Commission should take account of the views of the national regional authorities and the industry.
The Commissioner, when he replied to my report last month, seemed to get his geographical situations slightly mixed up - he did not know whether he was going to Scotland, Ireland or Northern Ireland.
I suddenly discovered that he went to Scotland and the Republic of Ireland but he did not come to Northern Ireland.
Hopefully, geographically, he will be much better placed in the future.
I know he knows where Northern Ireland is and I certainly hope he will come in the future to visit the fishermen there.
I want to say, before we come to a decision that will end the chaos - because I think we are all aware of the situation we are facing coming into December on TACs and quotas - that it is going to be extremely difficult not only for the regional and national areas and the fishermen but also for the Commission.
We need a better way of addressing this at a better time of the year with a greater lead in and greater cooperation than we have had in the past.
I ask the Commission to take that on board.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, allow me to start by thanking you for your support for our efforts to promote and strengthen the Community's participation in regional fisheries organisations.
I agree with all of you who have said that we need more regional fisheries organisations and I agree with Mr Varela and other speakers that the Commission has a role to play in these regional fisheries organisations.
We also agree with the House that the question of controls must be a cornerstone in the area of regional fisheries policy.
However, I must again stress the Commission's position that it cannot accept sole responsibility for controls in regional fisheries organisations.
It is in fact the Member States - in keeping with the basic structure of the European Union - which are primarily responsible for controls.
In exercising their sovereign rights as flag states, they must provide the necessary human, financial and material resources needed in order for the Community to meet its international obligations.
The Commission therefore stands by its conclusion in the communication that, as far as controls are concerned, NAFO is an exceptional case and should not become the rule.
The Commission should concentrate on its own job, which is to monitor and coordinate the implementation of controls in the regional fisheries organisations by the Member States.
The Commission is also required to carry out a huge amount of work in connection with negotiations held within the framework of regional fisheries organisations.
It would quite simply be inappropriate to disregard current institutional practice in the Community in relation to responsibility for controlling ships operating on the high seas.
I should like to reiterate two fundamental points here.
First, the Community must be consistent in its actions, irrespective of whether we are talking about controls in Community waters or controls on the high seas.
Secondly, the stand which we take on this subject must be in keeping with the stand taken during the current debate on the Commission's so-called core activities, which is why the discussion of control measures goes beyond regional fisheries organisations.
We need to select a comprehensive modus operandi which takes account of all fisheries activities in the Community, both in EU waters and on the high seas.
If we want to consider a completely new take on the Commission's remit in relation to controls inside and outside Community waters, then I think that it we should do so in connection with preparations to reform the common fisheries policy.
That means that we shall have plenty of opportunity here next year to discuss these issues in depth.
So much for the central tenet of the report.
I should like to make a few brief comments now on a number of other points.
As far as the time taken to implement the decisions of the regional fisheries organisations is concerned, I agree that the Commission's record can and must be improved.
Some progress has already been made but our efforts must focus on better planning.
On the question of infringements and sanctions: the Commission has always been in favour of including sanctions in the control regulations.
Without sanctions, we have no teeth.
Unfortunately, we have not succeeded so far in getting our ideas across because the Council has always resisted them.
But we shall try, as part of the ongoing work to create an area of freedom, security and justice, as formulated and decided at the Tampere Summit, to make progress on this question also.
Now to the reproach under point 16, where it says that the Commission wants to exclude Parliament from the process of Community participation in the various regional fisheries organisations.
That is quite untrue; in fact the opposite is true.
The Commission has always spoken out here in favour of the rules for cooperation between Parliament and the Commission and has always adhered to the rules of the interinstitutional agreement.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
COM in pigmeat
The next item is the report (A5-0305/2000) tabled by Mr Garot, on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development, on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation (EEC) No 2759/75 on the common organisation of the market in pigmeat [COM(2000) 193 - C5-0225/2000 - 2000/0076(CNS)].
Mr President, I have Mr Nicholson's problem in an even more acute form.
I turned up for my debate on ASEM III at the time indicated to find that the whole debate had taken place. I do not know what the problem is.
I think it is that one or two Members are absent which then brings the debate forward which means that more and more people arrive after the debate.
I do not know how we can solve this problem but my apologies to the House for not being present when I should have been.
I do not know how we can tackle this problem in the future.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, this evening we are going to be debating the situation of the pig industry and its COM, which has proved to be totally unsuitable in the face of the latest crisis which has just arisen.
Between 1998 and 2000, production surged disproportionately, with an increase of 20 million head of pigs, reaching an annual total of 205 million pigs slaughtered in the European Union.
This was accompanied by a 30% collapse in prices with its trail of consequences, which some producers, especially the young and those heavily in debt, often could not withstand.
Having been made bankrupt, some breeders had no option but to change social status by becoming mere employees of cooperative or private farms, whilst continuing to work on their former holdings.
Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, that is not the interpretation of the European agricultural model that the European Union wishes to project internationally.
Quite clearly, in the light of the objectives contained in Regulation (EEC) No 2759/75, as amended, one conclusion has emerged, and that is that the tools of the pigmeat sector COM, including private storage aid and export refunds, are unsuitable and inadequate. We have private storage aid, which is of less interest to operators now that it is being implemented in the context of a structural crisis, and export refunds, which are always useful, but which are dependent on international agreements which impose increasingly stringent restrictions.
It is necessary, therefore, to come up with new instruments to guard against a serious crisis re-emerging despite a high level of internal consumption and good use of export opportunities.
The ongoing improvement of the productivity of pig producers is already generating a growth in supply and if this were to be accompanied by the unlimited extension of the apparatus of production, it would inevitably result, once again, in a serious imbalance in the market.
The last crisis has taught us that the markets are now much slower to recover as, for the most part, specialised breeders maintain their overall production while waiting for better days to come.
Ladies and gentlemen, under these conditions, the problem concerns less the future of production than the future of producers.
That is why it is imperative that the European Union is equipped with flexible instruments to prevent and manage crises in the pig industry.
Accordingly, the Commission has proposed incorporating a new tool into the COM: regulatory funds.
The idea is a good one, certainly, but, as its application is optional for Member States and producers and it does not provide any suitable solutions for breeders in a period of crisis in return for the freeze on output it demands, it is of little interest.
In its present form, it would most probably be ineffectual.
That is why, fully aware of the extent of the problem, on the basis of my report the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development introduced amendments to make this proposal more attractive and more effective.
These amendments introduce measures intended to make it possible to draw up reliable forecasts for the market based on thorough assessment of the means of production; to establish regulatory funds in all Member States, supported by Communityaid, so that any pig producer in the European Union, whether breeder or fattener, who wants to join can do so in return for a commitment to stabilise output for five years; to establish conditions for the cofinancing of these funds by producers or their producer associations and by the European Union in order to encourage producers to join; to adjust the aid payments from these funds during periods of crisis and finally, to commit Member States to adopting, together with the Commission, the measures which appear to them to be best suited to restoring the balance of the markets in the event of a crisis.
This effort to firm up the market must take into account developments in production in each Member State and must have a bearing on producers who do not join the regulatory funds.
Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, these are the solutions advocated by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development.
We are convinced that these measures are such as to prevent crises in the pig industry, or indeed to manage them if by any chance they were to recur.
By using instruments which are flexible, complementary and hence indissociable, and at a reasonable cost for the European Union, we should accept the fact that we can make the future less problematic for our producers.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, as shadow rapporteur for the Garot report on the common organisation of the market in pigmeat, I should like once again here to make clear reference to the shadow side of the report.
The report, which basically makes provision for a compensation fund for pigfarmers, and hence goes beyond the Commission proposal, was adopted by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development.
I moved on behalf of our group for a split vote, as I personally reject the idea of a compensation fund for pigfarmers.
I am quite happy to say yes to a piggy bank for pigfarmers, but I say 'no' to a compensation fund for pigfarmers, especially to a compensation fund co-financed from European money.
I take the view that we do not need any more regulations or state intervention.
The whole point of the free market is that supply and demand even out at a specific price.
It is true that pigfarmers have been hit by an historic slump in prices.
But it was preceded by a period of economic stability.
A relatively limited supply, as the result of swine fever and the BSE debate and high exports to third countries have benefited prices and our farmers are again demanding that politics should keep out of it as far as possible.
This is again a good starting point for proving it.
To my mind, this is no time for hysteria.
Every self-respecting agricultural textbook talks of two classical pig cycles.
What we have seen over the last three years, albeit more drastically, is part of the classical pig cycle.
The pigmeat market is now one of the few agricultural markets which is still basically free from state intervention.
And the pigfarmers in my country are delighted at the fact.
Setting up a compensation fund will quicken the concentration of European slaughter pig production considerably because the risk of bigger capital investments will shift to the common fund.
I am aware of the fact that totally disparate agricultural philosophies apply in Europe; the philosophy of the federal system in Germany is quite different from that of the centralistic system in France.
I am quite against the idea of co-financing by the EU.
I am against any increase in state intervention.
As for European regulations - as many as are needed, but as few as possible.
What will we think up if there are any more agricultural risks, for example in the poultry sector?
We cannot stuff money into a new EU piggy bank every time. That would indeed be the thin end of the wedge.
Instead, it makes more sense if every pigfarmer sets up his own reserve, i.e. if every pigfarmer has his own piggy bank.
That is what I should like to see.
Mr President, the Commission proposal recognises that the pigmeat market in the European Union is subject to cyclical movements, with periods of balanced supply and satisfactory prices followed by periods of plentiful supply when prices plummet.
The periods of crisis are becoming worse and worse.
The last one caused prices to fall by over 30% from mid-1998 to early 2000.
The result is the disappearance of family holdings, whose only solution is to close down or to move into what is known as integrated production, in other words production in which the producers lose their independence as farmers and join a business structure - such as distribution chains or supermarkets - which dictates production plans to them in exchange for a certain economic stability.
We have sometimes even wondered to what extent the cyclical market crisis itself may not be caused by the speculative action of these business structures, which thus gradually take control of the sector for their own interests.
The Commission accepts that the only two ways to support the market - private storage and refunds - are insufficient to stave off the crisis, and yet it makes this timid and ineffectual proposal.
Its lack of imagination and lack of ambition are amazing.
Rather than a measure to guarantee producers' incomes when prices collapse, it is more like a paternalistic piece of advice: save up in times of plenty so you can get by in times of shortage.
What the proposal calls a regulatory mechanism consists of authorising a Member State that so wishes to establish a fund financed by those producers who join it on a voluntary basis for a minimum of five years, on the undertaking that they do not increase their stock.
The contribution from the Community budget is nil, and the Commission confines itself to authorising the levy thresholds and the fund payments from within the management committee.
The voluntary nature of the system means that the task of controlling production will be borne by only a few while the rest nullify this effect by producing without limit until the next crisis arrives.
For all these reasons the Commission' s proposal is disappointing and we believe it is unacceptable.
It does not solve the cyclical instability of the sector, it breaches the principle that the CAP will provide financial support and it is clearly an example of renationalisation and distortion of competences.
Hence we back the report by our Socialist coordinator, Mr Georges Garot, and the amendments approved in the Committee on Agriculture.
These turn the proposal into something very different by introducing, first, the compulsory nature of this measure for the Member States; secondly, Community cofinancing of the fund and the contribution of degressive launching aid; thirdly, Commission participation in crisis management measures; and fourthly, a broadening of the scope of this measure to cover piglet producers and closed-cycle holdings.
Reference is also made to the need to encourage producer organisations, the prevalence of which varies greatly from one Member State to another.
For the Socialists the amendments approved by the Committee on Agriculture provide an acceptable framework for the establishment of the proposed funds, and therefore if the Commission is not willing to accept these amendments, we ask it to withdraw its proposal, which in its present form has been rejected both by ourselves and by the sector.
Mr President, Commissioner, I should like to begin by thanking Mr Garot for his report, even if I do not agree with its content.
I agree that there has been a crisis in the pigfarming sector but I do not agree with Mr Garot' s proposal as to how future crises might be solved.
The fact is that the pigfarming sector has been the only sector which has until now been able to compete on market conditions with just a relatively few forms of intervention such as export subsidies and private storage, and it must continue to do so.
If subsidised by the EU, the regulatory fund proposed in Mr Garot' s report may well be of short-term benefit to small producers and help keep them artificially alive at the expense of larger and more productive producers who are, of course, the future for pigmeat production here in Europe.
The extra EU subsidy proposed in Mr Garot' s report would, in my view, be quite unreasonable in a year such as this when, with Agenda 2000 and the forthcoming enlargement to include Central and Eastern Europe, we are to reform agricultural policy.
We are not going to do this by inventing new aid schemes. Nor, moreover, is there any money in the Budget for this.
I should like to have a statement from the Commission on the extent to which this proposal is in keeping with the trade agreements with the WTO and with Agenda 2000.
In my view, it is in direct contravention of the common agricultural policy to establish national funds which will lead to unequal competition for European pigmeat producers.
What is perhaps worse, however, is that it may contribute to a renationalisation of agricultural policy.
I would therefore urge you to vote against both Mr Garot' s report and the Commission' s proposal so that the liberal policy which has so far prevailed in the pigmeat sector can continue.
Mr President, Commissioner, yet again we see just what can be done with a common organisation of the market.
My congratulations to the rapporteur.
If every common organisation of the market were as anti-cyclical as what Mr Garot has proposed, or if all organisations of the market were to work in favour of smaller holdings, as Mr Busk has just said, then holdings in Europe would be structured very differently.
The way in which the organisations of the market have worked in the past has served rather than impeded the concentration process.
It is interesting to see how the tables have turned.
Those who, like me, tend to oppose the organisation of the market in the usual sense, support this proposed amendment.
Mrs Keppelhoff-Wiechert, who has fought tooth and nail to prevent other organisations of the market from being withdrawn or to get co-financing for them, now says there should be no co-financing here.
If we were to apply the co-financing estimated here, i.e. 50%, to the other organisations of the market, for example in sugar, where the PPE is vehemently opposed to any change, that would instantly free up huge resources.
Mr Busk is worried that the WTO would be unable to accept this, but he takes a quite different view when it comes to the organisation of the market in sugar which, if you please, we must defend against the WTO.
This is a model just like the American model.
We are introducing an insurance system and can easily demonstrate that social aspects play a part.
I really do think that what the rapporteur has done here is a brilliant achievement; it shows just what you can do with administration when you set your sights on a specific objective and the objective is clearly specified here.
Mrs Keppelhoff-Wiechert, this objective does not suit you.
Then you should say so and we can argue it out.
This objective suits me fine and, as I say, if we had applied it in other organisations of the market, we would have a very different structure today.
As for co-financing and European contributions: the Commission has suggested adding an insurance system to the current organisation of the market, but only using money from the holdings themselves.
I mean, what sort of a proposal is that?
It is certainly no good to us. That leaves the other system and that is no good either because it fostered concentration.
If we are going to do anything, then it must be as Mr Garot has proposed.
He has turned the Commission's pathetic proposal into a reasonable, anti-cyclical, structure-securing proposal, which is why our group will vote in favour of this proposal and I trust that it will secure a majority tomorrow.
I am just curious, Mr Garot, to see what the decision-makers in the Council will make of it.
I personally do not think that it stands a chance.
It is because its objective is designed as I have just described that it will most probably be swept straight off the table, unless the French presidency has something up its sleeve which it can use as a sweetener.
And after that, it will probably be a first class funeral, but at least it will have been interesting!
Mr President, changing a market organisation is always a difficult decision and the objective, when weighing the alternatives, is to achieve as accurate a market-regulating intervention in supply and demand as possible, so as to ensure that production, in this case the production of pigmeat, secures farmers' incomes.
The report has been resisted and rejected.
Some of the demands go beyond the report because there is much which is out of kilter in the beef and pigmeat sectors.
The latest cases of BSE will result in reduced production and will eclipse everything put in place hitherto.
The globalisation of the economy is a red herring here and cyclical crises have absolutely nothing to do with it.
Slaughter cattle are being driven right across Europe, animal stocks are being cut back in return for state subsidies and huge ecological installations are being built.
Nor does this report offer any ready solutions; too much else needs to be done for that.
But the report does try to bundle production by applying the principle of voluntary action and by forming producer groups.
This is an honest and credible endeavour and I shall recommend that my group vote in favour.
Mr President, at a time when food safety is more than ever on the agenda and, above all, at a time when the entire meat industry in Europe is affected by mad cow disease, it is especially important that the reform of the COM in pigmeat is adopted without delay.
The market in pigmeat is subject to cyclical fluctuations with which economists are familiar, but the duration and the extent of the 1998/1999 crisis was unprecedented and highlighted the way this phenomenon is being amplified. Each crisis that occurs bankrupts countless family farms and pushes the industry more and more in the direction of concentration and integration.
This crisis clearly demonstrated the inadequacy of the current, extremely flimsy mechanisms of the COM in pigmeat and the need for a regulatory mechanism that will enable producers' incomes to be stabilised by a system of levies to be collected during periods when the economic situation is good and a system of payments to be made in times of recession, as the European Commission finally proposed along the lines of the French stabi-porc system.
But this proposal would be totally inadequate if it was possible for Member States to reject these regulatory systems and if the reserves used to maintain revenues in a period of crisis were drawn solely from producer contributions, as this would lead to a two-speed production in pigmeat.
On the one hand, the largest producers, or those integrated with processing industries downstream, would distance themselves from this measure, preferring the systems they already have: individual savings; bank loans and redistribution funds.
They would not have to commit themselves to limiting output and would retain their right to expand.
They would hence be the very source of the next overproduction crisis which would inevitable lead to the bankruptcy of the regulatory funds.
On the other hand, the more modest producers, family farms, would play the game of solidarity, accept to limit their output and contribute to a national regulatory fund which would drive them into bankruptcy when the next overproduction crisis occurred.
The current COM in pigmeat is extremely flimsy and much too hesitant.
This planned reform is the first remotely significant reform that the Commission has proposed since 1975.
The amendments introduced by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development at the instigation of Georges Garot, whom I must congratulate on his work, transforms this limited text into a wide-ranging one.
The changes made by the committee are major indeed.
The participation of all Member States in this new system will be compulsory.
Producers from all over the European Union will be able to subscribe to this measure.
The participation of the Community budget is also essential since, without it, those joining one of these regulatory funds would simply be faced with constraints and the system would not be attractive at all.
Efforts cannot be made by producers alone.
That is why our rapporteur proposes that the European Union should make a greater commitment by co-financing the regulatory funds.
In this way, far from creating an exceptional system from the standpoint of international practice, with this flexible system of preventing and managing crises we would be moving, at reasonable cost, towards what is practised in certain third countries, such as the insurance-cum-income systems in force in the United States and Canada.
We therefore support the proposal by the Commission, as profoundly amended by the work of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development, and will be voting in favour of the Garot report.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, let me begin straight away by saying that, in principle, I welcome the Commission's proposal to set up a compensation fund, even from the point of view of Austrian agriculture.
This fund may be just the instrument to reduce pigfarmers' losses in times of crisis.
The pig crises in 1998 and 1999 demonstrate the inadequacy of instruments such as private stocking and the export refunds of the common organisation of the market in pigmeat at the time.
I think that, if we are to avoid and manage such crises in the future, this proposal is the first way forward.
A fundamental point which the Commission has overlooked in its proposal is joint financing.
In my view, the basic principle of EU financing should apply to common organisations of the market, including the common organisation of the market in pigmeat.
It guarantees intensive participation on the part of farmers, thereby indirectly restricting production.
The proposal makes provision for the fund to be set up by the Member States.
We must, I think, ensure that all Member States set up the fund, so that farmers throughout Europe have an equal chance to participate in it.
As far as the management of the fund is concerned, state administration should be kept to a minimum; in other words, the Member States should approve and monitor the fund but should not administer it; that should be left to the producer groups.
Every farmer should be free to participate in the compensation fund., but if they decide to participate, they must sign up for five years.
I am positive that this instrument will improve the stability of the market and allow farmers in Europe to manage cyclical crises more efficiently.
Mr President, Commissioner, the rapporteur, Mr Garot, has dealt with the Commission' s proposal for pig industry funding realistically and in precise terms.
The aim to balance production and marketing beforehand will be of benefit to the production chain and to everyone else as well.
I would like to point out, however, that at this stage we should not be embarking on a regulated economy in the pig industry.
I agree very strongly with my colleague, Mr Busk, when he says that eastward enlargement lies ahead of us and, in a situation such as this, where we will have to take a serious look at the whole agricultural policy a few years from now, it is not, in my opinion, worth embarking on a regulatory mechanism for just one sector.
In this the south and the north are quite clearly opposed. In the south people are more in favour of co-financing.
On the other hand, the pig industry in the north works on the principle that it should be very firmly undertaken on a voluntary basis, on which schemes may be created, schemes which - as Mrs Schierhuber said here just now - pig farmers could join in different parts of Europe.
The Community could be providing funds in a mainly technical sense, financing technical matters in connection with start-up, and thus supporting actual start-up.
The way I understand it is that voluntary funds in the future will help to ensure there is also balanced marketing in the pig industry.
Mr President, first of all, it would be totally wrong of us to have come here tonight to either criticise the report or the Commission for coming forward with the proposal.
I should like to thank the rapporteur for his report.
It is the first time we have had a constructive debate on the problems that face the pig industry throughout the European Union - certainly in the eleven years I have been in this Parliament.
I am not saying it is right, I am not saying I agree with it, but at least it is the first time we have had a constructive debate on the subject.
There is no doubt that pig farmers, regardless of where you come from, have faced the most difficult period possible.
I have seen family farms go out of business; I have listened to farmers' wives wondering how they would survive because of the problems the industry was facing.
The question I have to ask myself is very straightforward and simple: will this proposal help to alleviate their difficulty either in the short- or long-term?
I have extremely serious reservations as to whether it can help the pig farmer in either the short term or long term.
Co-financing is one aspect, but I have a horrible suspicion that would perhaps create an uneven playing field in many countries throughout the European Union.
I have to ask the Commissioner - because this is the one thing that might be useful for some of us - whether this proposal will be mandatory on the Member States?
If it is implemented in every Member State then there is a degree of fairness.
If it is not implemented throughout every Member State, then there will be unfairness.
There will be the suspicion that producers in another Member State have an unfair advantage.
Can the Commissioner answer that?
Whether I will vote for or against depends on how he answers that.
Unfair competition must be avoided at all costs.
Pigs have always had - as has been said by Mrs Keppelhoff-Wiechert - tremendous highs and lows in price.
When the price has been high the producer has been doing well.
When the price has been low then the family is not doing well.
It is a question of balance.
This is the problem in the pig industry at the moment.
Is the Commissioner going to address the same problem in the poultry industry, in mushrooms, in tomatoes, in other industries that will have some particular difficulty at some stage in the future?
That is what we have to ask ourselves: can the common agricultural policy really cope with the challenges it faces at the present time?
While the policy is good, and while I pay tribute to it, we have to go back to the drawing board.
We have to look at it again.
We have to have further consultation and greater cooperation to find a way in which we can come forward with a proposal rather than asking the hard-pressed producers at the moment to pay for something that they cannot afford.
Let us look at how we can best support the industry in the longer-term.
Mr President, the really positive thing about this debate is that we are getting a very clear idea of what can be regulated within the common agricultural policy and what cannot.
So this will prove to be a memorable evening, particularly where the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance is concerned.
I fully understand why people want market organisation for intensive livestock farming, and why they should want to scrap agricultural policy for land-based production.
This is precisely the form of agriculture we have recognised as being the most sustainable and environmentally friendly form of agriculture for the future.
This is noteworthy in itself.
We will certainly revisit this theme in future discussions with the Green Group.
First and foremost, I would like to compliment the rapporteur, Mr Garot, on the fact that he has done his utmost to see if he can do something to help at a time when pig farming is lapsing into crisis.
That alone is worth a compliment.
Secondly, is the medicine he prescribes the right medicine?
I have grave doubts about that.
To be perfectly honest, I do not believe in his particular brand of medicine, and I will tell you for why.
I believe that market organisation only works if you talk in terms of co-financing, and European financing, and if agreements are reached regarding the volumes produced.
Otherwise, there is every risk that whilst the market or revenue will indeed level off, this will mainly occur in a downward spiral, which cannot be the object of the exercise.
That being the case, my preference is to have a free market for pig farming, where the market ultimately determines price trends.
If, however, we opt for market organisation, and reinforcement of the associated policy, then we would do well, in my view, to see that the producer groupings are better equipped, so that they occupy a stronger position in the market; a market which is becoming increasingly close-knit on the demand side, and which is gaining in influence.
You may ask yourself to what extent agriculture and horticulture in Europe can find an effective solution to this.
I would sooner strengthen groupings, specifically with a view to gaining a better market position and making better agreements.
I am therefore bound to say that I have reached a different conclusion to that of Mr Garot, and whilst I am almost inclined to say that I could almost go along with the Commission proposal in its present form, since we also have a duty to be honest, I feel that, basically, it does not actually do anything to address the issues.
Mr President, that is the approach I would go for; once again, although I reject the medicine prescribed by Mr Garot, I have the greatest admiration for all the trouble he has taken to explore the possibility of introducing more social support into the pig farming sector.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, first, I should like to thank you, Mr Garot, as rapporteur, for your excellent report on the introduction of a compensation fund in the common organisation or the market in pigmeat.
The crises in the pig sector which, thank God, we have since overcome, were in fact what prompted the Commission proposal in the first place.
Luckily we are currently in the buoyant phase of the pig cycle, meaning that supply has fallen and farmers are commanding much better prices.
Farmgate prices have been hovering around EUR 140-150 per 100 kilos for several months and experts continue to see a positive outlook.
It is clear from market developments that, as ever, the pig cycle is exerting its influence and still applies and that good times will again follow bad.
We must not overlook this fact during our debate of today's proposal.
What we are discussing is an instrument to support farmers' incomes in times of crisis.
We are not discussing a new common organisation of the market in pigmeat.
We have a common organisation of the market in pigmeat and we should not make the mistake of questioning the present common organisation of the market in pigmeat which, basically, works.
I should like, in examining the amendments proposed in the report, to concentrate on the points which clearly differ from the Commission proposal.
The first is co-financing.
Without doubt, this is, to an extent, the key question in the debate on this proposal and it is addressed in proposed Amendments Nos 11 and 12.
I should stress here that the main responsibility for a balanced market and for the resultant price levels lies in the hands of the pigfarmers themselves.
It is they, the pigfarmers, who decide on production volumes and, hence, indirectly and automatically on future price developments.
I think it would therefore be wrong to deny farmers their responsibility.
Apart from that, co-financing carries the risk of distorting the market's signals to the farmers.
I cannot therefore support the idea of putting all the market's eggs in an anti-cyclical price policy basket.
If we start an anti-cyclical price policy, then all we are doing is jacking up the pig cycle.
One thing I have learned today is that there appear to be members who support the idea of introducing co-financing in all common organisations of the market.
In other words, if we do it everywhere else, we will probably include the pigmeat market. But that is not the subject of the debate, at least not as far as I am aware.
The second important question is the voluntary basis for the system.
The Commission proposal gives Member States the choice of whether or not they wish to set up a fund, whereas the proposed amendment makes it compulsory for all Member States.
But we must not forget that European pigfarming varies and is organised differently from one country to another and that cooperation between the individual stages of the production chain is organised very differently.
As a result, there is a whole series of Member States, and of pigfarmers in those Member States, who will brook no discussion of a compensation fund because they say that they do not need it because they have other arrangements for coping with recessions in their income cycle.
Other countries are determined to have a compensation fund and I will tell you quite frankly that, if we were to propose a mandatory compensation fund, we might as well forget the whole idea, because it would never obtain a majority in the Council.
Then there is the question of including specialist breeders in the proposed system, as stated in proposed Amendments Nos 7 and 13.
I think this is asking for trouble because a) breeding is a very varied operation and b) support for breeders will not necessarily automatically fall in the same phase of the cycle as support for fatteners.
Plus, the weight of piglets various enormously, from 8 to 30 kg, and there is, as it were, no uniform price quotation system for standard piglets, meaning that there is no basis on which to support them.
I think it is far better here to establish an economic balance between the price of piglets and the price of slaughter pigs through the market rather than through artificial measures.
More importantly, we must not forget that in numerous countries farmers fatten their piglets themselves and hence have direct access to the compensation fund via the fattened pigs which they sell.
The Commission cannot accept proposed Amendment No 16 because this amendment would interfere drastically with the freedom of decision of farmers who decide not to participate in the fund, in order to retain their freedom.
Plus, the measures have not been defined, meaning that the decision on the measures to be applied basically stays in the hands of the Member States.
That would be genuine renationalisation and I cannot agree to it.
The planned reduction in production for each Member State depending on previous production sounds suspiciously like a quota regulation.
Plus, it would generate huge bureaucratic costs, including for the purpose of controls.
The Commission feels that it is only fair to subject farmers who participate in the fund to some sort of discipline, because they receive a certain income guarantee in return, whereas others, who do not participate, have no such guarantee.
In addition to these four core questions which the debate on the report has thrown up, there is a series of other, less fundamental proposed amendments, most of which deal with the details of the regulation - details which, in my view, should be included not in the Council regulation but in the implementing measures.
As far as adjusting aid on the basis of the number of animals is concerned, may I point out that the Commission proposal already makes provision for a legal basis for just such a procedure.
Before I finish, I should like to touch on a question addressed mainly in proposed Amendment No 6, namely improving statistics on herd trends and the possibility of forecasting production trends.
I really do not think that a new law or new provisions are needed here.
What is needed is proper, comprehensive application of current provisions by the Member States and their statistics offices.
My services have drawn the outstanding problems to the attention of their Eurostat colleagues responsible for inventories and have pushed for results to be improved here.
We have discussed this on several occasions over recent months and it is clear from our discussions that we have no shortage of provisions; what we are short of is people who take the provisions seriously, carry out the inventories of pig herds correctly and answer the questions put to the Member States truthfully.
You will have understood from what I have said that I am unable to accept your proposed amendments.
However, I thank you for the serious debate which we have had here and I hope that we shall be able to reach a result on the basis of the Commission proposal, because the problem here - and I make no bones about it - is that the Member States still have very differing views on this matter.
Mr President, allow me to put a question to the Commissioner, because I am rather annoyed.
He said that the Commission had no intention of changing the common organisation of the market in pigmeat.
But the title reads "on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation (EEC) No 2759/75 on the common organisation of the market in pigmeat".
Then what, pray, has the Commission presented to us?
If you want fewer radical changes than we do, then we can come to an agreement, but if you do not want any changes, then the text is a farce.
Perhaps you could explain.
If you present Parliament with a proposal, Parliament takes the liberty of introducing its proposals.
As is our right.
Mr President, allow me to explain.
I did not say that there would be no changes to the common organisation of the market in pigmeat as the result of the Commission's proposal.
Of course it represents a change to the common organisation of the market in pigmeat, of that there can be no question.
But from the opinions expressed during the debate, it appeared that what we were doing now was introducing a common organisation of the market in pigmeat and I took the liberty of pointing out that we already had one.
Thank you, Commissioner.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
(The sitting was closed at 11.10 p.m.)
Court of Auditors' annual report for 1999
The next item is the presentation of the Court of Auditor' s annual report for 1999.
I welcome the President of the Court of Auditors, Mr Karlsson, and I immediately give him the floor.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, on behalf of the Members of the Court of Auditors I would like to thank you all for inviting me to present the 23rd Annual Report of the Court.
As in previous years, this presentation marks the start of the discharge procedure for the 1999 financial year.
The report follows the format used for the past two years with chapters covering revenue in each of the expenditure areas under the headings of the Financial Perspective.
You will also find a chapter dedicated to the Statement of Assurance, and attached to the report you will find the Court's observations on implementation of the sixth, seventh and eighth European Development Funds.
The different chapters of the annual report address four main concerns.
Firstly, there is an analysis of the budgetary implementation of the budgetary management practices within the specific financial headings.
You will find that the Court has paid more attention to the follow-up to previous observations, in response to the demands expressed by this Parliament.
In each of the chapters the Court reports on the progress made in a number of areas on which it had reported in the past and I will return to some of these issues in my presentation.
Thirdly, in response to the request of the European Parliament, the Court has expanded its audit work on the Statement of Assurance and now provides additional information per area of expenditure in each chapter.
Finally, in each of the chapters the Court presents a number of other key audit findings.
Many of these findings are also reported upon in more detail in the Court's special reports.
Since the last discharge procedure the Court has adopted 24 special reports containing the results of audits which focus on a wide range of specific areas in which the Community's financial management can be improved.
Although these reports are not part of today's presentation, they are to be taken into account in the discharge procedure.
The total income for the 1999 financial year amounted to EUR 86.9 billion.
The gross national product-based resources represent 43% of this total.
The value added tax-based resources represent 36% and the traditional own resources are 15% of the total.
The remaining 5% is composed of the surplus resources of the previous year and other income.
This means that four fifths of the Community resources, the gross national product plus the value added tax-based resources, are calculated and fixed by using statistical data.
I would like to point out two major observations of the Court in this context.
First, for several years now, the Court has commented on the use of a statistical aggregated system (SEC79), which for all other purposes has already been replaced by a newer system (SEC95).
The difference is 16 years.
Further, in the context of the fight against VAT fraud, the Court has identified a method based on a comparison between fiscal and statistical intermediate consumption data that can be particularly useful in pointing to areas where the risk of fiscal fraud is high.
It therefore invites the Member States to consider the use of this method.
In the customs area the Court reports on the complexity and variable application of the outward processing procedure.
However, it also supports the Commission's proposal to modernise customs arrangements with an economic impact.
With regard to the 1999 expenditure, a total amount of EUR 93.6 billion was entered into the account as new commitments, and payments amounting to EUR 80.3 billion were recorded.
This is 96% and 92% respectively of the available appropriations for the year.
The utilisation rates of the Financial Perspective estimates are 91% and 83% respectively.
Expenditure from the Community budget is spread over many different areas.
It is, therefore, difficult to draw general conclusions on this budgetary implementation.
However, the Court makes the following major points.
Half of the 1999 expenses are recorded under the common agricultural policy.
As reported in chapter 2 of this annual report, the high rate of expenditure, which is almost 99% of final appropriations, is explained in part by numerous transfers that reflect in fact the poor quality of the initial estimates, of both revenue and expenditure.
The Court invites both the Commission and the Member States to improve the quality of these estimates.
There were also numerous transfers of appropriations for the Structural Funds that significantly altered the structure of the 1999 budget.
Further, there were major differences between programme amounts and the amounts allocated by the Financial Perspective and the majority of Structural Fund interventions had to be rescheduled.
In this area there was also an under-utilisation of commitment and payment appropriations and a concentration of transactions at the end of the year.
In areas where the Community programmes are implemented directly by the Commission, such as internal policy and external actions, implementation rates are somewhat lower.
There is also a heavy concentration of commitments and payments at the end of the year.
This is something that we have come back to over the years.
The Court repeats, consequently, its comments of previous years on the negative effects of this, for instance poor and hasty decisions, heavy workload creating a risk of errors and so on.
Finally, in both the chapters on internal policies and external actions, the Court finds that the Commission's own comments on budgetary implementation are inadequate.
The Court welcomes, therefore, the clear commitment of the Commission's answer to improve fundamentally its budgetary and accounting report.
The Court has produced an annual Statement of Assurance since the 1994 budgetary year.
Each year the Court has expressed serious criticism of the legality and regularity of the payments and the transactions underlying them.
This is the case once again.
Indeed, the audit of the 1999 payments revealed once again an unacceptable incidence of error which affected their amount or the reality or the eligibility of the transactions underlying them.
The majority of these errors occurred in areas of the Community budget that are managed by the authorities in the Member States.
They mainly comprise non-compliance with eligibility rules, overclaims, insufficient justification and calculation errors.
There are also other failures to comply with regulations and systems weaknesses for which the effects on payments cannot be directly evaluated but which increase the risks of errors occurring.
The most frequent examples here are problems in implementing regulatory control checks insufficiently, detailed supporting documentation and failure to comply with tender procedures.
Thus, for 1999, the Court did not obtain the necessary evidence from its audit activities to ensure that the underlying transactions were legal and regular, except for own resources, commitments and administrative expenditure.
On the other hand, for the sixth, seventh and eighth European Development Fund, the Court gives a positive statement of assurance.
Not only is it the duty of the Court to report on the errors found in its audits but we should also ensure that our audit findings are interpreted and used correctly.
Therefore, let me remind Members of Parliament that the high incidence of errors found by the Court cannot, and must not, be seen as an indication of the level of fraud affecting the Community budget.
Most of the payment errors found by the Court are due to problems of inadequate financial management and control and it is only in the case of a small proportion of the errors found that further reinvestigation by OLAF or the Member States' authorities is justified.
Another risk of misrepresentation is that the objectives for corrective actions are set in terms of diminishing error rates and obtaining a positive statement of assurance.
As the Court already pointed out in its previous report, a medium-term improvement requires a combination of general and specific measures, including the clarification and improvement of control procedures, particularly at the level of Member States.
In this context, the Court welcomes the Commission's plan for improving financial management presented to the discharge authority in the context of the discharge for 1998.
This reflection leads me to some comments on the reform of the Commission.
The Court welcomes the efforts of the Prodi Commission to build a modern and robust structure of management and control and, at the same time, to focus on the way political priorities are set and resources allocated.
Many of the weaknesses that the Commission now seeks to overcome have been emphasised by the Court on many occasions.
For instance, the proposals of the Commission to increase the responsibility of authorising officers for the execution of commitments and payments while bringing to an end the centralised system of prior approval of transactions by the financial controller, together with the creation of an independent internal audit service, is in line with the key requirement for improved financial management that we lay down in our Opinion No 4/97.
Another element of the reform that corresponds closely to a key priority identified by the Court is the increased focus to be placed on results and performance measurement within a framework of resource allocation that is consistent with predetermined priorities and objectives that are clearly defined and measurable.
At sector level, the Commission has now announced reform programmes which can be seen as a response to concerns expressed by the Court over a number of years, for example, the proposals for improving the management of external aid programmes.
This initiative is clearly based on an analysis very similar to that of the Court - most comprehensively set out in its Annual Report for 1997.
Whereas the Court encourages the Commission to proceed from principles to practice as quickly as is feasible, it needs to be recalled that, as yet, much of the reform is still on paper only.
The implementation of this new reform will need a genuine change of the management culture of the Commission, a process that will certainly take time.
The Annual Report 1999, when reporting upon the follow-up of previous observations, shows how difficult it is for the Commission to implement the needed changes which have been agreed upon.
In some cases, such as the reforms of the measures for the subsidised use of skimmed milk and skimmed milk powder or the programme of assistance to South Africa, as well as in certain areas of traditional own resources, the Commission has taken actions to remedy specific weaknesses reported upon by the Court.
In other areas corrective action has been slow.
For instance, for the milk quota system, the Court found that the overall situation had not significantly changed and that, contrary to the Court's view, increased quotas have been established, thereby giving rise to greater surpluses in the milk market and a heavy financial burden for public storage and disposal measures.
In the case of the import of dairy products at preferential rates, the Court considers that nothing has been done so far to avoid breaches of regulations similar to those reported in the Court's Special Report No 4/98.
In the area of the European Regional Development Fund, the Court followed up about 48 observations for which it believed a financial correction should be made.
There are only 16 cases where the Court is satisfied with the corrective measures taken by the Commission.
In the area of the social dialogue, the Commission has not undertaken all the measures it had agreed to carry out in its replies to the Court's observations.
In the internal policies area, the Court re-audited nine contracts at the Transport and Energy Directorates-General and eight contracts at the Research Directorate-General.
The Commission had only followed up three of the 17 contracts, with actions continuing on six others.
In its 1996 annual report, the Court identified a number of weaknesses in the management of an export promotion fund for Nicaragua and Honduras.
In its discharge recommendation published in 1998 the Council called on the Commission to review its relations with the regional bank and recover amounts unduly credited by this bank.
At the end of 1999, the Commission was still in the process of setting up a new organisation.
From these and other examples, it is clear that the Commission has hitherto not only been slow in implementing corrective measures but that it particularly faces problems when it comes to recovering unduly paid amounts.
In its 2001 programme, the Court has therefore planned an overall audit covering all budgetary areas of the Commission's recovery procedures.
As I indicated before, the Commission's financial management is only part of the overall management of Community funds.
Member States are responsible for the day-to-day management of the bulk of Community funds in the areas of the common agricultural policy and the Structural Funds.
This annual report and the special reports published since the last discharge continue to draw attention to serious and persistent weaknesses in Member States' management and control systems.
For instance, an important category of errors reported in the Statement of Assurance are irregular deductions by the central or local administrations on agricultural subsidies.
Also in the area of the common agricultural policy, the Court calls upon Member States and the Commission to make checks more effectively by comprehensively applying to all Common Market Organisations inspection procedures comparable to those of the Integrated Administrative and Control System.
The dramatic events of the recent past have clearly demonstrated the increasing importance of management and control issues on the European agenda.
It should be clear to each and every one of us, whether as representatives of European institutions or of Member States, that this reflects a permanent change in the values and opinions of European taxpayers.
They require, in exchange for their confidence and contribution, that the European funds are being spent in a meaningful and honest way.
The commitment undertaken by the Commission should be seen as a constructive reply to this challenge: a reply that deserves our support.
On the other hand, the Commission will be aware that it has now raised high expectations and that it is obliged to put into practice its good intentions and to produce results.
It rests with the budgetary authorities, which have successfully triggered the reform that addresses public financial management concerns, to continue and reinforce their efforts to ensure that this reform succeeds.
In practice, they will thus have to devote sufficient attention and resources to the follow-up to, and the feedback from, the reform process.
Members of the European Parliament will be at the forefront of this.
The new President of the Italian Court of Auditors, the Corte dei Conti, who was officially installed in office a few weeks ago, said in his instalment address: "I am convinced that the relations between the Court of Auditors and Parliament would be significantly improved if Parliament strengthened the instruments that are designed to ensure that Parliament systematically takes results of audits carried out by the Court of Auditors into consideration".
I make his words mine.
They imply that we wish to see a development of the working organisation and methods of this Parliament to reflect this need for structural change.
Yesterday I had the opportunity - for which I thank the President - to discuss with the President of Parliament involving all the committees of this Parliament in the business of financial and management control.
Last, but not least, we will also need the cooperation of the Member States.
Being responsible for the day-to-day management of the bulk of Community funds, the Member States need to strengthen their financial controls and to take up fully their responsibilities in the fight against fraud against the Community budget.
Only when all actors - the Commission, Parliament, the Council, the European Court of Auditors and the Member States - commit themselves to the reform and cooperate in this achievement will the confidence of the European taxpayer in Community financing be able to be restored.
Thank you, Mr President. I now give the floor to Mrs Schreyer, who will speak on behalf of the Commission.
Madam President, I would like to thank Mr Karlsson very sincerely for his presentation on the annual report.
Mrs Schreyer's report was just as interesting.
But I would particularly like to thank you, Mr Karlsson, as President of the Court of Auditors, for the way you have kept the Members of the Committee on Budgetary Control informed this time round.
This has enabled us to prepare for today's debate without having to obtain details from the press.
As you said, Mr Karlsson, 1999 was a dramatic year, with the resignation of the previous Commission and the appointment of the new one.
We do not expect that the new Commission will immediately be able to rectify all the mistakes and irregularities that Parliament uncovered and because of which it called, in vain, for reforms at that time.
Like the Court of Auditors, we welcome President Prodi's efforts to reform the Commission and we are following the implementation of these efforts in a constructive but not uncritical way.
Are things finally changing for the better as regards the Community budget?
We would have liked to have been able to say "yes" to that question, now that the new Commission has been in office for over a year and has, since September 1999, already been directly responsible for part of the process of implementing the 1999 budget.
Unfortunately, we cannot yet answer with a clear conscience, even armed with the Court of Auditors' new annual report.
The Court of Auditors has quite rightly noted the many steps that the new Commission has taken - or at least announced - in order to improve matters.
Mrs Schreyer also mentioned this.
I have in mind new procedures for setting priorities and allocating resources, changes in human resources policy, fundamental improvements in budget implementation and financial control, reform of programmes and the creation of an efficient audit service.
But all these are still hopes for the future.
The reality as described in the annual report is, however, more sobering.
What is particularly regrettable and almost incomprehensible is that there are still problems about the reliability of accounting procedures.
In other words, the Commission has not put its books in order, and the closures only reflect the true financial position subject to serious limitations.
Information is missing on the payment of advances and the payment of instalments at the year end, and existing commitments are, believe it or not, undervalued by EUR 2.6 million.
At the same time, the Court of Auditors says that potential claims have been significantly overvalued.
Parliament expressly drew attention to these serious accounting errors during the discharge procedures for 1996, 1997 and 1998.
Even if it is difficult and time consuming to fundamentally change budget management, we might have hoped, Commissioner, that the new Commission would at least manage to get the books straight without delay.
But it is apparent that they have not even succeeded in doing that, which is a matter of great regret as far as I am concerned.
When you assumed office, Mrs Schreyer, you assured us that you would strive to achieve this.
The European Parliament now finds itself in an extremely difficult situation because earlier this year, in January, it declared that it could no longer accept a situation in which the 1999 closure was still marred by serious errors.
You are familiar with the wording of that decision.
But if there is no closure, that means that no discharge can be given for budgetary management, just as we said back in January.
Closure is a condition for such a discharge.
A solution needs to be found here, and I would like to ask you, Mrs Schreyer, if a correction of the 1999 accounts could be envisaged.
Once again, and for the sixth successive time now, the Court is unable to give a positive statement of assurance, that is to say, it cannot give a guarantee of the legality and regularity of the procedures on which the financial statement is based.
The number of errors occurring is too great for a guarantee of this kind to be given.
The error rate is still well over 5%.
Expressed in euros, that means that a sum of approximately EUR 5 billion was spent incorrectly.
I most certainly recognise that fraud is not always involved, Mr Karlsson.
It is often a case of carelessness or misunderstandings in the face of complicated rules and procedures, but there is no getting round it: an error rate this high is unacceptable and cannot be tolerated in the long run.
I must refute your comments about poor implementation in the Member States, Mrs Schreyer, given that the Court of Auditors was quite clear about where the error rate lay within the Commission and, ultimately, it is still the Commission that bears responsibility for budget implementation.
I would like to see more rigour here, so that we can really tell the European public that their money is being properly administered.
We are now getting down to work in committee and will cooperate closely with you.
Madam President, I should first of all like to thank the Court of Auditors for its annual report.
I should like to draw attention to a number of problems, and I hope that Mr Karlsson will be able to answer my questions today.
In connection with the 1997 discharge, we in Parliament agreed that, as Mrs Theato has just said, no discharge for 1999 could be given if the Court of Auditors was not in a position to issue a positive statement for 1999.
However, I should like to know how serious the situation is regarding the 1999 accounts.
Yesterday, I asked you a question - I appreciate there was not much time - but I should like to have a completely clear answer from you to the question of how great a percentage of error there is.
We are told that this cannot be properly calculated.
Yesterday, a member of the Court of Auditors gave a press conference and, at this press conference, a figure was given, and so I think we should be given one here, too.
Is the percentage of error 5.5?
I hope I can obtain an answer.
The Commission employed more than EUR 80 billion in 1999.
However, the Commission has not been especially good at administering the Budget.
The amount of fixed assets has been set EUR 240 million too low.
Liabilities have been set EUR 2.6 billion too low, and unredeemed liabilities have been set EUR 1.2 billion too high.
If the management of a private firm had committed such major blunders, then I am almost certain that the owners would have given them the sack.
But let us pour a little oil on the waters now, so that we do not get ourselves worked up at this early stage.
The former Commission, which was primarily responsible for the 1999 Budget, was indeed given the sack.
The new Commission is to be judged this year on how good it has been at cleaning up and implementing reform.
I am therefore pleased that the Court is attaching more importance to following up the earlier annual reports.
This emerges clearly, of course, wherever there are still problems, but also where some sound improvements have been made.
I could have done with seeing a much more practical annual report from the Court of Auditors.
We must have more figures, and we must have more facts.
Mr Karlsson said yesterday that it is not easy to come up with figures.
I appreciate this, but I asked one of my employees to look at the agricultural section, and in an hour he had prepared a complete report on which countries were concerned, on what problems there were and also on how much money had gone missing.
If this can be done in an hour by an able employee here in Parliament, then we can probably also demand that the Court of Auditors issue a report of this kind on all sections.
Some unpalatable facts will emerge of course but, at the same time, we are demonstrating that transparency exists.
In that way, we can shut the press up, which is merciless and scents blood every year when the Court of Auditors produces its report.
Once and for all, we can say: 'Here are the problem areas, and we want to find solutions' .
I believe this is a good way of doing that, and I also think that the report should be much more practical.
I should also have liked the Court of Auditors' report to have been a little more user-friendly and to have provided a number of clear recommendations, for example one or two per chapter.
I could also do with seeing the Court of Auditors produce its report earlier in the year.
It would give us more time for the discharge procedure in Parliament, and we should not need to defer the discharge every single year.
As rapporteur, I now have only 14 days in which to ask the Commission questions, and in 14 days it has to supply me with the answers.
It is almost unreasonable to make such demands, so if we could obtain the report much earlier, we could also produce a piece of work of even higher quality.
I am also pleased that the Court emphasises that the 7% margin of error does not only relate to fraud, and I hope that the press is listening hard in the press room so that it is not only the scandals that are reported.
There may be irregularities or ambiguities.
What is really a relief is that it looks as though the right way to combat fraud has been embarked upon.
Only very few cases have been referred to OLAF and for criminal investigation in the Member States, but it is important to remember that, as Mrs Theato also mentioned, 7% of the Budget corresponds to DKK 5 to 6 billion.
If it comes down to figures, that amount is larger than the whole of the EU' s development aid.
Reform of the Commission is largely about making the individual Directorates-General responsible, and I should like to ask the Court whether it has plans in future to restructure the annual report so that chapters for the individual Directorates-General are prepared.
I shall try as early as this year to see whether this can be done so that we can make a start on assessing the Directorates-General.
We can also make a start on assessing the Commissioners and giving them marks according to how good they are.
They could perhaps be given a push in the right direction, if need be.
The Court of Auditors emphasises once again that daily administration of most EU resources, for example within agriculture and the structural sphere, takes place in the Member States, and I completely agree with what has been said to the effect that the Member States now need to make sure they get their act together.
The Member States avoid responsibility, misappropriate funds and do nothing whatsoever to exercise control and, every time criticisms are made, a storm of criticism rains down upon those in Brussels, that is to say the Commission and others.
I think the Member States should be ashamed of themselves.
In 1995, a convention to protect the EU' s economic interests was adopted.
There is only one Member State which has implemented this in its legislation.
It is simply not good enough, so make sure you in the Member States get your act together.
Finally, I want to say that I am delighted with the cooperation in connection with the discharge.
I am certain that we shall achieve a result, but it requires openness and honesty from all parties.
We in Parliament are in no doubt that we want to be involved in doing something sensible, and we shall give discharge in April if we get what we are asking for.
Madam President, I too would like to thank the chairman of the Court of Auditors for their report, and the Commissioner for their response to it.
Yet again, public opinion will be the first casualty when the news hits the streets that there is to be no positive statement of assurance for European expenditure this time round either.
Everyone knows - and this will crop up time and again - that the Member States spend the most money.
So they must be the first port of call when it comes to raising revenue as I see it.
It is also no secret that the lion' s share of expenditure goes on agriculture.
A number of years ago, the Commission established, at Parliament' s insistence, that if there are irregularities, this could mean an additional financial correction of 25% for the Member States.
I understand that the Court of Auditors is studying this, and would it not have been interesting if the Court of Auditors had studied what effects this had?
Could the same principle be applied to other sectors?
I would be very interested to know.
I completely share Mr Blak' s dissatisfaction with the fact that the Court of Auditor' s report does not contain exact figures.
Is the reliability of the expenditure 5% or 7%, and is it true that reliability is less than 3% in the case of agricultural expenditure?
The Court of Auditor' s constant refrain is that they do not have sufficient staff to analyse this.
That may well be true, but when the Court of Auditors reaches a verdict, I take it as read that it will be based on exact figures.
What I would like to know is why these figures cannot be published?
I also think we should set up a mediation committee for agriculture. Then, any disputes between the Commission and the financial corrections could be brought before it.
Would the Commission and the Court of Auditors be prepared to endorse this proposal?
On a final note, Madam President, this financial report covers 1999.
The Commission is bound to point out that it did not take office until September 1999, and will therefore deny all responsibility.
I think it is high time we heard the last of that.
I feel the Commission must give us a clear indication of when it expects to be able to deliver a positive statement of assurance, for we cannot keep postponing it year after year, as we have done since 1995.
Mr President, Mr President of the Court of Auditors, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to thank you, Mr Karlsson, for this excellent report.
I would also like to thank you for the procedure you followed.
We were able to read things through more than a week in advance, and come well prepared.
I believe that in principle it is a sound procedure.
Only, to be perfectly honest with you, I was rather disenchanted with yesterday' s meeting of the Committee on Budgetary Control.
It was too short.
And you actually failed to answer a number of precise and really rather crucial questions put to you by the delegates, which I think is a shame.
Some of these questions have already cropped up again in today' s debate, and I read in today' s Süddeutsche Zeitung that some of your colleagues do make detailed statements.
Their themes are fraud, irregularities, and mistakes running to DM 8 billion.
I also read that the erroneous percentage is certainly in excess of 5%.
Why do we keep harping on about this figure?
Both Mr Mulder and the rapporteur did the same.
We want to know why because it is important in our estimation.
We have made political statements about this in the past.
I would therefore be grateful if you could respond to this question again.
We are aware that things are in very bad shape in the Commission, and that it still lacks a culture whereby the European taxpayer' s money is administered effectively.
That is a pity.
Of course, we all know that the Commission is working on its programme of reform.
The President of the Court of Auditors also made reference to this, and in this sense, next year' s report will, of course, be the moment of truth.
There is also indeed a need for action in the regional and national parliaments, because it is the Member States themselves that are responsible for a great many errors.
I would therefore urge my counterparts in the national parliaments to ratify the two conventions that have yet to be ratified by all the Member States.
I also call upon the Ministers, Heads of State and Government to endorse the proposal for a European Public Ministry at the Nice Summit.
Lastly, Mr President of the Court of Auditors, a final request.
Could you please make your report a little more user-friendly?
Tell the whole story.
Name those Member States that are performing well, and those that are doing badly in some areas.
It will make it more readable.
It will raise interest in your report and give people the incentive to do better next time.
Madam President, I, along with all my colleagues, wish to welcome this annual report which is presented to us in a spirit of constructiveness.
The Commission and the Member States should see it in this light and use the findings of this report as a tool for improving their performance in managing the EU's finances.
It is regrettable that it is not possible for the Court of Auditors to give a clean bill of health to the Commission with a positive Statement of Assurance.
This situation has not changed since the first Statement of Assurance was published in respect of the 1994 budgetary year.
Member States are responsible for managing 80% of the expenditure and a range of errors has been found by the Court at Member State level.
This is somewhat disquieting.
We should remind ourselves that the EU resources come directly or indirectly from European citizens.
There is, therefore, a clear duty to account for every last euro of expenditure.
We must ensure that the European citizens receive value for money.
I am pleased that the Commission has taken steps to improve its management control over Community finances, and systems are being put in place in the Member States.
This will diminish the level of errors.
The Commission must be vigilant in its pursuit of proper management procedures at Member State level.
We in Parliament must also be vigilant in seeing that the Commission carries out this task.
The Commission has responsibility for implementing the budget.
Proper management and control procedures, lack of planning, inadequate evaluations, loose or non-existent eligibility criteria frequently feature in this report.
This, combined with the negative Statement of Assurance, makes some worrying reading for the taxpayer.
I know that this report and the work that Parliament is about to embark on in the context of the discharge procedure will contribute to greater vigilance when it comes to Community spending.
In conclusion, let us approach our task in a positive and constructive spirit in the best interests of the citizens of the EU.
Madam President, Mr President of the Court of Auditors, in 1999, the Netherlands made the highest per capita contribution to EU coffers.
As a representative of these net payers, however, I am really rather disappointed in the Commission' s performance.
We could give this Commission the benefit of the doubt over the discharge for 1998 because it was saddled with the legacy of the ousted Commission.
However, the present Commission has to answer for the 1999 annual report and, unfortunately, it lists a whole series of shortcomings in the Commission' s accounts.
What concerns me is that the Commission evidently does not consider itself bound by the budget approved by Parliament.
Firstly, the Commission has committed EUR 400 million more than we budgeted for, and secondly, it has modified the original budget and implemented a revised version without Parliament' s approval.
In 1999, the Netherlands only received 3% of total agricultural subsidies, when proportionally, it should work out at around 5%.
I do not begrudge the poorer EU countries a comparatively larger share of agricultural aid, but to me, this makes it all the more unpalatable that the majority of irregularities should have arisen in the payment of agricultural subsidies.
I would be very interested to know which Member States have benefited the most from these irregularities.
The number of irregularities in the structural funds payments warrants a thorough investigation into the way these funds operate and their effectiveness.
Reforming the Commission is no guarantee that previously recorded irregularities will not arise in the future.
Therefore, now and in the future, the Commission will be held to account for non-compliance with the rules.
Madam President, I should like to begin by thanking Mr Karlsson for the important work the Court of Auditors is doing, and I also thank him that this year the publication of the report has not been pre-empted by newspaper headlines based on biased leaks, which sow so much mistrust of the work of this serious and impartial Court and of the tasks this Parliament and the other institutions have to perform.
I especially appreciate the impartiality of his report, in which he points out the faults and praises the progress; for instance, he praises the fact that the Commission is getting moving.
I belong to a group of MEPs working on the reform; we have just been with President Prodi and have seen that he has personally taken on the development of the White Paper in accordance with many of the recommendations that have been received year after year from the Court over which Mr Karlsson so ably presides.
It must be said that this is actually a process on paper which takes time to turn into action, but it is going along the right road.
It is going along the road that you, this Parliament and the independent experts are indicating.
Problems still lie ahead on this road, however, such as the overly-long transitional period laid down for the reform of the Financial Regulation.
We are in a period that is bad for everyone, including those responsible for payments, in which we have an old system, a new system and an intermediate period in which there is a certain feeling of confusion.
I should be grateful if the Court would issue its opinion on the reform of the Financial Regulation soon.
Madam President, I must ask: where is the Council in all this?
I think the Council is responsible for five sixths of Mr Karlsson' s report and for the spending it approves.
Where is the Council?
Right now, Madam President, I should like to stop talking and wait for someone from the Council to come here.
Therefore, may I suggest that in the next debate on the presentation of the accounts, the Council should be present and intervene.
I repeat that the part of the report I most value is the recognition that the Commission is getting moving; but the same cannot be said about the Council, whose importance lies not only in the spending figures.
You say that you keep on drawing attention to serious and persistent weaknesses in Member States' control and management systems, and you say that most of the errors occur in the main spending programmes managed by the Member States' administrations.
I believe that we, the members of this Parliament, will be able to point to and lay the blame on our own administrations if they do not meet their commitments, but you have to do us the favour of clearly indicating the States and the programmes.
I am convinced that in order for the Community' s financial interests to be properly defended any management failures must have consequences in the budget and Parliament must be able to deny funds to a Member State for repeated breaches of spending control regulations.
Mr Pomés Ruiz, it is totally unacceptable that the Council' s seat is empty.
You were quite right to bring it to my attention.
Madam President, I am grateful too that the Council have come back because I have got something to say to them as well.
Can I first of all thank Mr Karlsson because cooperation with the Committee on Budgetary Control this year has been much better than in previous years.
Your work is crucial to our job because you are the experts and we then sort out the political problems.
We must not forget that this report refers to the 1999 budget, the year when there was the forced resignation of the Commission, so it is clearly too early to judge yet.
Next year will be the beginning of the real test as to whether the Commission's reform has started to bite at all.
It is interesting to note that a key part of the Commission's reform is the whole question of who takes responsibility.
Where does the buck stop?
Who is responsible?
We should today be assessing how the Commission and the Member States spend the money rather than assessing the work of the Court of Auditors.
But I find that the work of the Court of Auditors has not been done sufficiently well to help us to do our job.
Let us not forget, and I hope the Council once again is listening, that 80% of the money is spent in the Member States.
The Court, as in other years, has failed to point out exactly where those failures occurred.
We have asked time and time again for a 'sinners list'.
We want to know where the problems lie, in which Member States, in which areas.
We even want to know about good practice.
You will note from one part of the report that two Member States have been exemplary in terms of VAT collection but how are other Member States supposed to copy these Member States if they do not know who they are.
We need names.
If you the Court will not do your job of naming and shaming, then we will have to do it for you.
But your legitimacy as an auditing body will be questioned, and some might even suggest that some members of the Court are keen to protect the interests of Member States that nominated them.
Will you make a commitment to do this in future, Mr Karlsson, because a lack of clear information in the report makes it very difficult for us to put pressure in the right areas on the worst offenders.
I call on you also to publish a league table of those countries which have the worst record of maladministration in the EU and in what areas.
Europe's taxpayers deserve to know where the money is going.
Without the facts we are fighting fraud with one hand tied behind our back.
Of course, there are no magic solutions to improving financial control in the Commission.
The whole process will take time.
We have a lot of vested interests to challenge but we will be watching next year's report for concrete evidence that the measures the Commission has put in place since its investiture have had a real impact in stamping out financial mismanagement.
Madam President, the enlargement of the European Union is looming, and the report by the Court of Auditors leaves us in no doubt that there is still a great deal of work to be done in the candidate countries too.
If we are to do all this on the already modest budgets we have at present, how are we to manage when these countries actually become members and start participating in the common agricultural policy and the Structural Funds?
My group therefore feels it is imperative to start implementing our rules on financial control in the candidate countries without delay.
We cannot start treating them as fully-fledged members soon enough in this respect.
I would therefore ask the Court of Auditors to give us more information about this in future reports, so that we do not have to face any nasty surprises come accession day.
Madam President, it is all very well having one representative from the Council here, but that is not enough, because - as has already been pointed out on several occasions - the majority of serious errors have been committed in the Member States.
The Committee on Budgetary Control can no longer tolerate the impression being created, year in year out, that 'it is a real shambles in Brussels' , when the main culprits are sitting in the capital cities.
That is why, Mr Karlsson, we are asking you to give us a better idea of who is doing well and who is making a mess of it.
Only then, i.e. if those responsible are named, will we be able to tackle them and really get down to putting Europe' s house in order, so as to win back our citizens' trust.
Finally, winning back that trust is also an important aspect, and I hope that by the end of this year, Parliament will have a clear statute, so that never again will these delegates be shown in a poor light in a Court of Auditors report.
In order to achieve this, I also wish you, Madam President, a great deal of staying power, and would like to thank you for the commitment you have already shown to date.
Madam President, I too would like to very sincerely thank the Court of Auditors for its report and also for the assessment that the Court gave the Committee on Budgetary Control yesterday, in which it stressed once again the much-needed efforts being made at reform.
However, I would also like to support what Mr Staes said earlier.
I think that if the Court leaves this much room for interpretation in its report, the result will always be critical headlines.
For example, the Süddeutsche Zeitung today has "Over DM 8 billion misspent - Court of Auditors refuses to give Commission discharge - Accusations of sloppy budget management".
This headline relates to a press conference by Mr Friedmann, and I must ask, Mr Karlsson, why Members of the Court of Auditors are making different statements, first in our Committee on Budgetary Control and then apparently to the press.
I believe that we urgently need clearer criteria for next year's report by the Court of Auditors.
The Commission and the Court really have a duty here.
We need objectives in the various sectors, so that the public can genuinely judge where improvements have been made, otherwise the same thing will happen again every year, despite Parliament's endeavours in the direction of reform, based on the Court of Auditors' reports.
We give our blessing to these reforms and then headlines like this more or less wipe out the benefit of all these efforts at reform in the public's eyes, because the public then just focuses on the mistakes and does not see the efforts that have been made to really achieve reforms.
I therefore implore all of you to consider once again how we can set objectives so that we will be better prepared in terms of media relations next year.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, we recently reached an agreement with the Court of Auditors under which we would be able to obtain advance information from the Court's annual report on a totally confidential basis, and we also agreed that we would be discreet about this.
I am saddened to see that the Members of the Court of Auditors do not apparently respect this kind of agreement.
So my question is whether we should repeat an arrangement of this kind in the coming years.
I really think that you should have some concerns about the culture on your side, if the Court of Auditors is not capable of keeping its side of the bargain on such issues.
Secondly, various honourable Members have already mentioned the lack of clarity here.
You know, Mr Karlsson, that if you do not include the figures in the report, then others will work them out for you.
Mrs Rühle and other previous speakers have mentioned percentages.
Bearing in mind that there are error rates of up to 7%, Mrs Schreyer can no longer come along and tell us that the Court has endorsed the Commission's actions and has said that the Commission is on the right track, because that, of course, would be the track over the edge of the cliff!
But you have not included that in your report, and I am sick and tired of hearing, year after year, that the Member States are responsible for 80% and the Commission for only 20%, while the report itself does not point the finger of blame!
The points Mrs van der Laan made earlier should be included, and I am pleased to say that we agree about that.
Let me be quite clear about this, you should name the Member States who are to blame even if you are nominated as Members of the Court of Auditors by those same Member States.
After all, we have to judge what the new Commission achieved in 1999.
What disturbs me, Mrs Schreyer, is that in many cases you have not honoured the commitments you gave to act on the Court's comments.
I urge you, there really is some scope for improvement in the future - otherwise, your protestations that you want to adopt the right approach in tackling irregularities will merely be empty words.
Mr President, although the Court cannot provide a positive Statement of Assurance for 1999, the tone of the report on the whole is more positive than it has been in previous years.
I would like to congratulate the Commission, and Commissioner Schreyer in particular, on the Court's observation that many of the changes it has requested are being implemented or are on the way to being implemented.
There is particular praise for the reform programme set in motion last year.
I would also like to pick on the Council by asking why it is not moving forward on Article 24 of the Financial Regulation.
Parliament moved very quickly to give its opinion and I hope that Council will be able to do the same and adopt its position well before Christmas.
Having said that, I was disappointed in the report as the first step in the discharge procedure.
It is too political in the negative sense of the word.
It avoids strong criticisms and it does not point any fingers.
Other Members have already pointed this out.
Member States should be put on the spot when they misuse Community funds, and political groups in this Parliament should be named when they misuse taxpayers' money, as my colleague, Mr Kuhne, pointed out earlier this year.
The error rate should be made explicit so that targets can be set for getting the error rate down.
We need to look at the way the Court works and how its independence from the institutions and the programmes it is meant to audit can be strengthened.
That may require giving the President of the Court more power to take decisions on the Court's working methods and on the way it communicates.
I should like to say a few words about Parliament's place in this report.
The report is positive about steps that have been taken by Parliament to remedy problems that have been identified by the Court, too positive in my view.
Many of these changes have either not yet been implemented or have been implemented partially.
Parliament can solve most problems by swiftly moving on two fronts. Firstly, by instituting its own internal audit service and secondly, by adopting three urgently needed statutes: a statute for Members, a statute for assistants and a statute for political groups.
Finally, Mr Karlsson, while we, as a Parliament, make all these changes, perhaps you could go and help America count its votes!
The error rate in the Florida count is clearly still too high.
Perhaps some European Union common sense will help sort out the problem and give George Bush his rightful place in history - its dustbin!
Mr President, Commissioner, Mr President of the Court of Auditors, ladies and gentlemen, this new report from the Court of Auditors which we have just received is of interest to the Committee on Budgetary Control because it makes a number of points concerning the problems of managing the Community budget, while at the same time warning us against the narrow interpretations that could be extracted from the crude exploitation of certain figures.
But in addition to these, Mr President, we need more detailed explanations and analyses in order to progress.
Let me quickly expand upon three points.
First of all, there is a question of terminology: even though all too often no clear distinction is made between the notions of fraud and irregularity, the Court of Auditors warns us against the temptation to consider irregularities or errors as tantamount to cases of fraud.
But it must be pointed out that the Court of Auditors itself says that cases of fraud are few in number.
This report raises another point: the problems linked to VAT.
VAT is an important component of the Community budget revenues.
But it has to be recognised that we are faced with a complex system.
Rates differ from one Member State to the next; their make-up also differs from one Member State to the next.
For example, there is regional VAT in some Member States.
We also still need to continue to question the implementing of fiscal harmonisation.
The third point I would like to make concerns the debate which took place yesterday evening when the Court of Auditors' presented its annual report to the Committee on Budgetary Control.
The Court of Auditors was asked - and a number of speakers have reminded us of this morning - to explicitly name the Member States in which fraud and irregularities have been uncovered.
I would warn us against the temptation to indulge in such practices.
We are not looking for scapegoats, either in our institutions or in our Member States.
What is more, as the working method applied by the Court of Auditors is based on sampling, we only have a partial view of the situation.
The report from the Court of Auditors highlights, somewhat more so than in the past, the situation regarding the management and control of Community funds by the Member States.
This analysis should lead us, as MEPs, and the Commission to put forward proposals to improve the management and financial control systems which the Member States must implement in order to protect the financial interests of the European Union.
In conclusion, I would call for improved cooperation with the Council.
Mr President, Mr President of the Court of Auditors, Commissioner, over the last two years the Court of Auditors has published six special reports on the subject of the common agricultural policy.
In its special report on subsidies for the disposal of skimmed milk, it highlights a lack of supervisory measures, a level of falsification of milk data and fraudulent use of this data that is unparalleled in any other agricultural sector.
In its report on the disposal of butter, the Court of Auditors noted that 89% of the budget is spent on subsidies to the food industry through procedures of dubious transparency and of even more dubious efficiency in terms of their impact on farmers' incomes.
In both cases, this involves a limited number of countries and a limited number of economic agents, who are the direct beneficiaries of these policies.
In what has been its most important work on the common agricultural policy, the special report on arable crops, the Court concluded that, from 1993 to 1997, the Community budget paid out a sum of more than EUR 13 billion more than could reasonably have been expected.
Arable crops represent 43% of the CAP budget, but only 10.7% of the end product.
In 1995, almost 40% of payments went to the top 3% of beneficiaries, whilst 57%, the smaller beneficiaries, received only 4.5% of payments.
The Court, therefore, quite rightly concluded that support for farmers should not be provided on the basis of price, production or area, but of support for the net income of farmers or of agricultural work units.
These are excellent, high-quality documents, which are a "drop in the ocean" in a common agricultural policy that still gives special treatment to larger farmers at the expense of the smaller ones and to countries and regions at the heart of Europe at the expense of peripheral countries and regions.
It is a shame that the Court of Auditors' annual report, which is supposedly drawn up to reflect the most relevant aspects of the work undertaken in the course of the year through the special reports, did not include these studies and decided to concentrate on other issues on which it had not undertaken specific studies.
First of all, on the procedure for presenting the annual report to Parliament and the Budgetary Control Committee, I am happy to listen to the assurances from Members of Parliament that the situation this year is more satisfactory than before.
I hope that we can jointly conclude that we have found the right approach to the discharge procedure.
I say to Mr Staes that I am sorry I did not have the chance to answer all the questions that were asked in yesterday's meeting.
I may also have that problem today.
However, I pointed out that we are only at the beginning of this discharge procedure. I sincerely hope that we will be able to give a reasonable answer to any question that Parliament or the Budgetary Control Committee wishes to ask and that all questions that were asked yesterday and in this debate will be properly answered.
I now turn to the construction of the Statement of Assurance and the question of figures.
First of all I point out - not only to Mr Blak, rapporteur for this year's discharge, but to Mr Mulder - that we have gradually changed and developed the procedure for drawing up the Statement of Assurance in close collaboration with this Parliament and the Budgetary Control Committee, to meet with the wishes of the Committee by including in the Statement of Assurance the specific observations in the different budget areas.
This is a result of the discussion that we have had hitherto.
I emphasise - to Mr Mulder, Mr Blak, Mrs van der Laan, Mrs Morgan and to all the other speakers who have expressed themselves on this issue - that the Court will continue to develop that.
But I should like to make it abundantly clear that a procedure of this kind has to develop very gradually so that we do not have a complete change in the method of data collation because then the value of this exercise would not meet the requirements we are set under the Treaty.
Concerning the accuracy of the figure that Mr Blak queried: 5.5% or 3%?
I do not want to sound demagogic but this question is intellectually on the same level as the question "when did you stop beating your wife".
Do not ask me questions that are impossible to answer.
We did not produce a figure last year and we have not produced a figure this year.
So the question of whether last year's figure corresponds to this year's figure is unreasonable.
A Statement of Assurance is a very detailed exercise, including not only specific observations on the different budget areas but also a global appraisal.
We will study that in detail, with your excellent secretaries.
I am very happy to hear that you have staff at your disposal able to summarise the Court's report in one hour.
I am extremely happy.
Perhaps we will steal that person from you.
But we will have a chance to go through all that.
I will see to it that the rapporteur for the discharge is fully informed of all the details.
Members of the Budgetary Control Committee point out the need for more precision.
You are right that we have to be more precise in our observations.
When you study this annual report you will find that what the Court is trying to do is to see to it that the clearance of accounts becomes a real instrument for analysing shortcomings in implementing the agricultural policy.
But a delay of more than two years makes the value of this exercise very limited.
What we also point out is that, in the other area of the big bulk of spending in the Member States, we do not have a procedure corresponding to the clearance of accounts.
That is in the Structural Funds.
It is very difficult to be more precise when we do not have a clearance system that would give the answers that we ask for, for instance in respect of the Social Fund.
I pledge that we will continue, together with the Committee on Budgetary Control and Parliament, to see that we develop more precise information so as to tackle the real problem.
The Court entirely agrees with Parliament that it is not only a question of reform of the Commission or of Parliament reforming its way of working with financial control.
The Court of Auditors also has to change its working methods.
Now, to the question of naming: I cannot accept Mr van Hulten's view that this report is too political in the sense that we avoid naming the names that should be named.
You are listening to a Member who, as rapporteur for the Committee on Development, was once responsible for naming not only two countries but two companies and where the Court of Auditors was taken to the Court of Justice because of that.
He implies that for political reasons we are scared to mention the names necessary for the audit that we independently find important, but I have evidence to prove the opposite.
It was quite clear, in this particular case, that the Court of First Instance supported us by saying we not only have the right to mention these names but also a duty to do so.
If you look at the report of the Court of Auditors on the anti-pollution measures of the Commission, you will find not only countries named but also regions and the French Member of the Court of Auditors from Brittany, Mr Jean-François Bernicot, did not protest at the fact that we dealt with his Brittany page after page.
When it is relevant, from the audit point of view, we mention everything that has to be mentioned.
This is the policy and principle of the Court.
The intention of the Court of Auditors is not to become a political instrument but to be an objective instrument for your political control here in Parliament and we will continue to work towards this end.
Having said that, I pledge that we will listen carefully to Parliament's requests for more precise instruments of analysis and we will ensure that we can use all these instruments to satisfy the needs of political control.
I will come back to that next time when I report and give you the plan for the programme of work for next year when we see each other again.
I stress, Mr Mulder, what I said yesterday.
From a technical, statistical point of view, specific DAS figures on each country and major political field would require an enormous amount of personnel because when you diminish the population you increase the need for the sample so the amount of sampling will require an enormous amount of work that I do not think anyone would find feasible.
That is why we should use other methods and adopt the approach that we have agreed on the specific observations field and bring the DAS exercise more in line with the other audits, not only of the Court, but also of the Commission and of the Member States, in the clearance of accounts.
I was also thinking about Florida this morning, Mr van Hulten, and I am thankful that I was not responsible for auditing the election procedure in that specific state.
There is always something to be happy about.
I hope that the debate is over so that I can answer any question that I may have forgotten.
I must comment, Mr Blak, on what you said.
You want us to restructure the report and we have done that.
I would just like to remind you that after the dialogue that we had between the Committee on Budgetary Control, we have restructured the report.
You suggested that the report should reflect the portfolios of commissioners or directors-general.
I would warn against that.
Commissioners, like Mr Fischler who is responsible for executing half of the budget, must have a bigger chapter than those commissioners who have no dealings with the budget.
Let us be open and discuss how we will structure the reporting so that it will be as satisfactory as possible.
Thank you very much, Mr Karlsson.
The debate is closed.
Ladies and gentlemen, as I am sure you will have noticed, the last part of the speech by the President of the Court of Auditors was marred by an unfortunate bug that intruded between his speech and this Chamber.
For that reason and in order to sort out this bug, we shall have to suspend the sitting for two or three minutes to find a way of solving this technical problem.
(The sitting was suspended for three minutes in order to solve a technical problem)
General product safety
The next item is the report (A5­0309/2000) by Mrs González Álvarez, on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, on a proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive on general product safety (COM(2000)139 - C5­0224/2000 - 2000/0073(COD)).
Mr President, today we are debating a proposal on general product safety.
The Parliamentary Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy considers it to be a generally good proposal.
Therefore, there are few amendments.
Perhaps the quality of the proposal is due in part to the fact that the Commission consulted over 14 consumer organisations and these pointed out the difficulties there had been in implementing the 1992 directive.
I think some of the observations made by the consumer organisations are included in the Commission' s proposal.
I shall give one example, one that I know the Council has some difficulties with, but which for Parliament is highly important and we wholly support it: the ban on exporting products deemed unsafe to third countries.
And the same has happened with other proposals in the document, which to us seem acceptable.
Therefore we have not made too many changes, but there are some which we believe will better safeguard consumer rights.
This report was approved by a large majority in the Parliamentary Committee on the Environment, and I shall therefore stand by the result of the Committee' s vote.
The proposals approved in the Committee on the Environment deal with enhancing transparency and consumer information; ensuring the recall of products even when they are already in the hands of consumers; limiting professional confidentiality to the bare essentials; clarifying the definition of a safe product and a dangerous product; including the monitoring of the safety of product installation and maintenance (because sometimes this installation and maintenance may present a risk to consumer safety); including the precautionary principle, a useful principle little used in the European Union (if it were, we would not have problems such as mad cow disease, to be examined this afternoon, the dioxin issue, or other matters relating to genetically modified products); ensuring a certain harmonisation of surveillance and follow-up programmes (it is important that Member States should maintain some equality in these surveillance and follow-up programmes); and in general arranging for consumers to be given information in the language of the country in which they buy the products.
Mr President, unfortunately we cannot accept some amendments first tabled in the Committee on the Environment and now tabled here, which go against these principles.
I shall mention two examples.
The first concerns Amendment No 4.
It proposes removing a paragraph which simply asks producers and distributors to inform the authorities in the Member States immediately if they learn of a dangerous product.
We must not allow this paragraph to be removed.
Another paragraph that some wish to remove concerns professional secrecy and says that professional secrecy must be subordinated to the efficiency of dangerous product surveillance and follow-up services.
We must not allow this paragraph to be removed either.
Some amendments, such as Nos 1 and 18, deal with questions that basically concern the United Kingdom, and it must be said that all the groups from the United Kingdom, whether socialist, popular or green, have supported them vehemently and they have been approved in the Committee on the Environment.
They relate to a matter that is very specific to the United Kingdom, that is, charity shops and sales more or less between private individuals.
Some of us from other countries do not understand so well this concern of our United Kingdom colleagues, but the amendments were approved in the Committee on the Environment and so I have to explain the fact.
Mr President, I thank the Commission and the Council for their collaboration in the preparation of this report.
I believe the Committee on the Environment has drawn up a report that tries to go more deeply into consumer rights and safety.
In view of what has happened in recent years, especially in the food sector, I believe this to be a very important directive and I hope it will be approved by a large proportion of this Parliament, even though, as I said before, certain amendments presented go against the spirit adopted in the Committee on the Environment.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the attitude of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market towards this matter is quite different from that of the responsible committee, the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy.
We believe that a whole raft of amendments to this proposal for a directive are necessary, and regret that the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy has not adopted these.
I am therefore deeply grateful to the PPE Group for having adopted these amendments here today and tabling them for further debate here in this Chamber.
I would like to comment on just two aspects.
First, we believe it is wrong that the possible liability of suppliers of services is addressed under this directive on general product safety, because we quite simply consider that issues relating to potential liability of suppliers of services have no place in this directive on general product safety, but should, if necessary, be dealt with in parallel elsewhere.
My second point is about export bans, which have previously been so highly praised.
A majority of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market is of the view that there is no legal basis for these.
In light of recent experience, notably the European Court of Justice ruling on tobacco advertising, I can really only urge this House to heed the recommendations to plenary of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, as the committee responsible for such matters.
Otherwise, I regard it as quite possible that the European Court of Justice will make another embarrassing ruling on this issue.
For this simple reason we have expressed a different viewpoint, and we can only advise this Chamber, on behalf of a majority of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, to accept Amendments Nos 38 or 41 in particular, as these relate to a weakening of export bans.
On behalf of my group, I would like to say that if neither of these amendments is adopted, the PPE Group believes that the entire report should be rejected, because we really have had enough of adopting illegal proposals in this place!
Mr President, in March this year we adopted the directive on cableway installations designed to carry persons.
If the directive had already been implemented, the accident in Austria might not have happened.
This demonstrates just how important legislation is here, and directives in areas as sensitive as product safety need to be implemented as soon as possible.
I hope that will happen before 3 May 2002.
The proposal on product safety before us today is a general directive relating in particular to those areas not covered by existing directives.
I would like to thank the Commission for adding a very important new point here.
I have in mind the presumption of conformity, that is to say that if products comply with European standards they are considered to be safe.
I believe that this principle is enormously important for consumer protection because it makes it possible to check at any point whether a product complies with standards or not.
In view of this, Amendment No 37, which provides for external certification and for CE declarations to be issued not just by companies, but also by external and impartial agencies, is particularly important for consumer protection, because it would, of course, considerably increase consumers' confidence in such declarations.
In the case of Amendment No 14 on the publication of standards in the Official Journal, I naturally have some difficulty with this because the present copyright is with the national standards agencies, who are therefore entitled to royalty payments from the European Union.
In addition, there is the question of what the scope of current standards in Europe is and what the scope of European standards would be.
I therefore have some very considerable reservations and wish to reject this particular provision.
With regard to export bans, it cannot automatically be assumed that our standards are appropriate throughout the world.
There are many countries that have their own regulations and safety standards which meet those countries' needs far better than standards currently in force in Europe.
Mr President, Commissioner, Mrs González Álvarez has produced a very convincing report, but my group does not agree with the idea of product liability applying to services as envisaged by the Commission.
For example, in many sectors, products are no longer assembled by the manufacturer, with the component parts instead being delivered to dealers.
This means that everyone involved in the sales chain who can affect the safety characteristics of a product now bears liability as a manufacturer, so that all dealers who carry out assembly work are classified as manufacturers.
We believe that in such cases the trade should not be burdened with manufacturer's duties under product safety legislation.
There are certainly other ways of guaranteeing adequate protection for consumers under civil law, for example, compensation for damages as a consequence of contractual liability.
I must say that I was amazed that the Commission's experts have not solved this problem themselves and I trust that the new Commissioner will give this problem some more thought.
And I hope that there will not be any problems with the Commission as regards exempting charitable organisations and non-profit making bodies from the provisions of this product safety directive.
When it comes to exports, I quite agree that exports should be banned in cases where the Commission has stopped a product from being placed on the market or has ordered a product recall.
But a Commission requirement for safety checks cannot be sufficient grounds for bringing whole branches of the export business to a halt.
As various honourable Members have already said, at the very least proof that different safety rules apply in the importing country should be accepted.
I can only urge the Commission to think again about this problem area, please.
We are at first reading.
At second or third reading it is necessary to secure the famous 314 votes, and if the report is still in the same form as now that will certainly not happen.
Mr President, I join the general congratulations to Mrs González Álvarez who has been a sympathetic and inclusive rapporteur.
She may occasionally have found the eccentricities of British car boot sales hard to follow but that, too, came within the remit of her personal charity.
This directive should be welcomed by the whole House and the issue of general product safety and its extension is something which must be commended.
In the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, under the wise guidance of our rapporteur, we passed a series of amendments which, again, my group would commend en bloc to the House today.
We are less happy with some of the later ones.
We have heard the justifications for them and for the reprise of the industrial arguments which we heard in committee.
We remain unpersuaded and we will vote against most of them.
Perhaps before the vote, Mrs Lulling or one of her colleagues, will tell us what the exact wording, particularly in the English version, of Amendment No 42, is.
We could support it if the wording was 'installation and maintenance' and not 'installation as maintenance'.
I am sure this is an error and if this can be confirmed, we will support it.
This proposal includes some extremely valuable general principles including the one which the other side of the Chamber appears to find offensive.
That is the principle that we do not export products that we believe are unsafe for our own people in the European Union.
Increasingly, as world trade develops, we are faced with this problem and we have to tackle it and not back away on the grounds that somehow the rest of the world does not matter, whether it is the safety of its health, its foodstuffs or the product which we export to it.
We have to look now at the links between products and services.
The Commission have begun to take a tentative but welcome step in that direction and perhaps the Commissioner will say more about that when he replies.
Finally, I would like to say a word about charity shops and car boot sales and all those other exchanges of donated and individual second-hand goods.
The charity shops welcome the general protection of this directive.
But they need an exemption from the obligation under Article 2 to provide information that they simply do not have.
Our Amendments Nos 1, 8 and 18 bear on that point.
I hope it will be possible for the House to support these because it cannot be anybody's intention to see these valuable and usually non-profitable charitable activities effectively driven out by an information provision which should relate to mainline manufacturers and to new or well attested products.
Provided the vendor can always inform the buyer of the nature of the goods and the limitations on the information that should be sufficient.
Mr President, it is a fact of life that directives must be evaluated and modified from time to time, and in fact this occurs all too seldom.
As far as we are concerned, the Commission deserves to be complimented on the way it has handled matters on this occasion.
The procedure it followed was first-rate and also very inclusive.
This directive gives rise to a certain tension between what can reasonably be expected of producers, on the one hand, and consumer protection on the other.
In that respect, I would, in a sense, concur with Mr Lehne when he said that recent statements by the Court indicated that this is a rather nebulous area, when it comes to what the Union can, and cannot, do.
In particular, the aspect concerning the definition of exports is something we must look into very closely.
As matters stand, my group is inclined to support the proposals now on the table, but I would appreciate it if the Commissioner could go into this aspect again in a little more depth.
Incidentally, we support the Commission' s proposals concerning the extension of the directive's scope of application to include services, and also the incorporation of migrated products, even though there is certainly still a lot more that could be done in these areas, which will no doubt fall to us in the future.
We concur with the rapporteur where he has highlighted the importance of providing consumers with information about the risks, and the need for transparency, especially in the sphere of health and safety.
That must indeed be the general principle.
Two final remarks, the first of which relates specifically to a particular amendment concerning the Commission' s proposal that producers should inform the competent authorities immediately when they discover that a product is dangerous.
We believe this to be a very important element.
There is a proposal to scrap this idea, one of the considerations being that producers should not have to incriminate themselves, and also in the light of professional secrecy.
We feel that the emphasis really must be on consumer protection here, and that a producer who discovers that his product is actually dangerous should not be allowed to sit on his hands.
Finally, a brief question for the Commission about Article 4, which concerns European standards and the question as to whether they must be disclosed.
I would be grateful if the Commission could go into this in a little more depth.
Mr President, the proposal under consideration was certainly long-awaited.
However, what we have to decide is whether it responds fully to the aims which, eight years ago, it was hoped to achieve through its promulgation or whether it may create further confusion.
And this is certainly not the fault of the work carried out by Mrs González Álvarez, who has endeavoured very successfully to improve the legislation under consideration, but is inherent in both the guidelines and parts of the proposal itself.
Firstly, in the case in point, the Commission, as the principal author of the legislative process, appears to have appointed itself an administrative authority, although there is no adequate legal and transparent legislative structure to define this new role, even from the point of view of defining its field of operation and monitoring its rapid action decisions.
Furthermore, in view of its potential power to act autonomously as regards the introduction of emergency measures, not to mention the presumably lengthy period which will pass before it is possible to ascertain whether these measures are well-founded, even purely in terms of employment, it should be noted that there is no mention of the damage which would be caused to a company - to its employees in particular - by an erroneous decision.
On the other hand, it does provide for a ban on exporting products classed as dangerous, which is certainly evidence of the Union's high level of civilisation, but there is no clear indication of whether this ban is consistent with the procedure known as Prior Informative Concert, laid down, in fact, by international conventions.
The concept of liability, in terms of the definition of the word product, product traceability and the inclusion of products used to provide services in this definition, also appears to be open to interpretation and therefore to subjective action.
At the same time, we should consider the possible interpretations as a product of the raw materials in the manufacturing processes and the positive implications of this in terms of guaranteeing health and safety at the workplace, although this endeavour is limited by the lack of an appropriate European statistics recording system and by the inconsistencies between legal systems for recognising an occupational illness.
In conclusion, I call upon the Commission to set in motion a coordination project within the framework of existing Community legislation and to make our legislation both more transparent and also genuinely beneficial owing to its certainty.
Mr President, it goes without saying that we need a certain basic level of consumer protection in the European Union.
But do we really need a completely harmonised and uniform standard of protection?
It does not seem to me to be a particularly good idea, quite apart from the high cost, stringent regulation and associated red tape.
I would have thought it would be better to take more account of subsidiarity.
A Danish or German consumer has different safety requirements to a Dutch or Italian consumer.
We must give more consideration to this diversity in the directive on general product safety.
Furthermore, I feel there is insufficient reason for the Commission to produce proposals on the safety of services.
By its very nature, the service industry is less suited to this approach.
A producer can take a product back, but it would, of course, be rather difficult for a service provider to do so with a service.
I welcome the fact that exceptions have been made for shops associated with charitable institutions and non-profit organisations, as well as for articles sold as second-hand goods at markets or car boot sales.
Finally, I was wondering whether, on closer inspection, Amendment No 14, tabled by the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, has been formulated correctly.
It does not seem to me to be a problem if an agreement is reached between a standardisation body and the government, which makes European standards freely accessible to the public. After all, that is not the same as the Commission publishing the European standards.
I would be interested to hear what the Commissioner has to say about this.
Well done Mother Europe!
Thank you Mother Europe for taking care of your children!
Or should I say, rather, thank you Father Byrne!
Thank you because all the safety directives aim to preserve the well-being of our European citizens, from minors, from children right up to the elderly.
This is certainly positive.
However, I do recall a substantial discussion which I had with my daughter, Elisabetta, when she was nine years old and wanted to be allowed to go out on her own.
I told her that she could not go out unaccompanied because it was dangerous.
Then, some years later, when I allowed my second daughter, who is six or seven years younger, to go out on her own, Elisabetta protested: "But Daddy, you never let me go out on my own and here you are, letting my sister out alone, and she is younger than I was!"
In effect, a good father must indeed take into account the safety of his children, but he must also realise that they cannot be wrapped in cotton wool. They have to learn to be independent.
What is the point of all this?
The point is that all the safety directives must be balanced. A balance must be achieved.
We must indeed be safe but we must not stifle production, in this case, which has to be free.
Most importantly - and here I am addressing the Council representative - how can any safety directives be effectively implemented if the Council refuses to endorse the directive on safety inspections and controls?
The outcome will be the same as in the mad cow affair: thousands of safety measures leading, regrettably, to the slaughter of millions of animals.
Mr President, I congratulate the rapporteur on her work, which addresses the fundamental concerns of consumers' associations, which must be accepted as equal partners in a constructive dialogue.
We Socialists in the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy support the Commission' s initiative to clarify procedures for informing the public and for recalling products that are deemed to be dangerous, and for extending this responsibility to distributors and producers of services to the extent they are involved.
These producers and distributors must unequivocally accept the consequences of the foreseeable risks inherent in their products, from the installation of equipment to its maintenance.
They are also responsible for informing the authorities and consumers and for fair compensation for damages.
Recalling products in a situation of risk should not be done as a last resort but must begin as soon as there are reasonable grounds for taking this course of action in the light of recent scientific advances.
Community standardisation must be based on appropriate scientific knowledge and we must therefore foster cooperation between Member States in researching the safety of products in general and of high-risk groups in particular, such as children, the elderly, new youth cultures, new lifestyles and people with a history of illness.
The reliability of product safety and after-sale care represent added value for a "made in Europe" label at a particularly difficult and crucial time.
Any measures that increase confidence and mean that European products are manufactured and distributed with respect for workers' health, for social rights, for the environment, for fair competition and with rigorous safety requirements are to be welcomed.
Any product that does not match up to this standard must be withdrawn and appropriately disposed of, because products that we would not wish for ourselves should not be exported to more disadvantaged countries either.
I hope that this directive will help to respond, in part, to the European public's increasing concerns about consumer safety.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, there has been a directive on general product safety since 1992.
The purpose of the present debate is to review the experience we have gained with the existing directive, to incorporate that experience and to eliminate any shortcomings.
I rather doubt whether we have adequately achieved that.
There are certainly complex legal issues here.
The scope of the directive in relation to the wide variety of national and Community product legislation needs to be defined, as that legislation, too, covers the same safety ground.
We need to ensure seamless consumer protection but without regulating the same things more than once or even in contradictory ways.
The possibility of having a product's compliance with regulations certified by an external agency would certainly be very helpful in this case and would ensure a clearer and more logical approach.
However, it would have been better to have an EU regulation providing for a general European system and eliminating the simultaneous existence of national regulations in Europe.
In the food sector, for example, there are also numerous rules and regulations which are currently being amended and revised as a result of proposed EU regulations and I think this will help us to reach a high standard of safety.
In other sectors, this directive has been extended to other fields of application.
The inclusion of service-related products will lead to dealers and the craft sector increasingly being burdened with obligations which are actually the responsibility of the manufacturer.
Elsewhere, we are calling on the Commission to present a proposal on the safety of services, so it is not evident why we should or would want to regulate service aspects here and now, instead of waiting for the Commission's proposal, since it is becoming increasingly clear that problems with demarcation between different provisions will arise and that legal uncertainty will grow as time goes on.
Just a few more words about export issues.
On the one hand we are demanding widely varying safety standards and like Mr Blokland are calling for national and regional needs to be taken into account, and on the other we want to impose our national provisions on countries we export to.
I feel that this means there is a fundamental contradiction in the directive's approach, which we cannot support as it is proposed here.
Mr President, at this time it is certainly nothing new to state that there is a great divide between the citizens and the European Union.
Lack of confidence in the possibility of ensuring food safety, for example, is spreading like wildfire and, when all is said and done, obscures the Union's positive work in this sector.
But we are going to discuss this today.
In this context, it is therefore important to emphasise the political value of the directive upon which we are about to vote.
Thanks to the Commission's sound proposal, further improved by Mrs González Álvarez's work, the text that we are examining today at last brings good news for consumers, to which, moreover, the non-governmental organisations which represent them bear witness.
The laws on product safety, in particular the safety of those products which have hitherto escaped regulation by the vertical legislation already governing the matter, is being improved, consolidated and made more transparent.
A great deal of effort has been made to better define the interaction between vertical laws on certain categories of products and this new horizontal directive, so as to definitely achieve a satisfactory result.
Then I would like to stress the importance of the amendments adopted by the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, which increase transparency towards the end consumer and apportion responsibility to distributors as well as producers in the event of products deemed dangerous being withdrawn from the market.
In the hope of seeing the final line taken by the rapporteur endorsed and declaring my support for her regarding the amendments which are to be put to the vote in plenary, I trust that this directive will rapidly continue through the procedures so that the European citizens can be provided with confirmation of the Union's undertaking to preserve their safety as soon as possible.
First of all I wish to thank the rapporteur, Mrs González Álvarez, the draftsmen, Mr Rübig and Mr Lehne, and the respective committees for their very comprehensive report on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive on general product safety.
The current Commission proposal is in response to the numerous problems related to the health and safety of consumers which have occurred recently.
Although the review and revision of the directive are formally required by the directive itself, this coincides with the reinforced commitment by the Commission to safeguard the health and safety of consumers.
The revised directive will be of relevance for food safety for only a limited period of time but it will, in the long term, improve the possibilities for dealing with non-food product safety problems.
I would only say a few words to present the main aspects of this proposal.
The idea behind the directive is simple: that only safe products are placed on the market.
This means European products as well as imported products.
The two key objectives of the general products safety directive are: ensuring a high and consistent level of protection for consumer health and safety throughout Europe and ensuring the proper functioning of the internal market.
We had extensive consultations with stakeholders - as the rapporteur has acknowledged - on implementation of the present directive, which brought to light certain weaknesses which we are now trying to correct.
We first clarify the scope of the directive.
This directive is meant to provide good and consistent assurances of the safety of products for consumers.
It is also meant to fill possible gaps in sectoral legislation, for instance, market surveillance or emergency procedures that are rarely provided for in specific legislation.
However, it does not apply when specific sectoral legislation covering the same aspect applies.
This also means that when new sectoral legislation is devised it supersedes the corresponding provisions of this directive.
For example, in the foodstuffs area - as you well know - when we have a food authority, the authority itself should provide a notification system which will take over from the general product safety provisions.
We wanted to make sure that the directive gave the best coverage possible to products used by consumers.
This also means products which have migrated from the professional field to personal use: for instance, laser pointers; and, secondly, products which are used to provide a service.
We wanted to have a more efficient system.
This implies additional obligations for producers and distributors to provide information.
The present situation is less than ideal.
It is incredible, for example, that authorities in our Member States are sometimes informed by the US authorities that a certain European product is dangerous.
The notification is compulsory in the United States but not, so far, in the European Union.
As you know, law is no good if it is not applied properly.
Member States will now be required to strengthen the tasks of competent surveillance authorities.
They will be required to establish sanctions.
They will have to develop links with other Member States as well; in particular, through a network of enforcement authorities of Member States.
This is also extremely important from an industry point of view in order to make sure that a level playing field is maintained between competitors and especially with imported products.
Improvement of Rapex (the rapid alert system operated by the Commission) is also necessary.
The scope of Rapex is extended to include voluntary measures taken by industry to withdraw a product.
The practical operation of the system will be improved.
We now also provide for the possibility of opening the system to third countries, in particular to the candidate countries: simplification of procedures for emergency measures at Community level so that we can take rapid action following the advice of a regulatory committee.
We have now introduced an export ban for products withdrawn at Community level.
Another point to which I wish to draw your attention is the question of improved transparency.
Consumers often lack confidence because they do not know what is happening.
Nothing undermines consumer confidence more than a belief that something is going on that they do not know about.
We believe that, in line with the general policy of the Commission, citizens have the right to know which real dangers they are exposed to and the measures taken to prevent that.
The limitation to this is professional secrecy as defined in Article 287 of the Treaty, except when there are overriding public health reasons.
I expect that exception will be drawn and interpreted narrowly.
I am very pleased that the report of Mrs González Álvarez endorses the main principles of the Commission proposal.
Many of the proposed amendments of the report are an improvement on the text and can therefore be accepted by the Commission.
Allow me to address first the amendments with which the Commission cannot agree.
Firstly, Amendments Nos 1, 8 and 18 propose to exempt second-hand goods sold by charity shops and non-profit organisations, private persons, flea markets and car boot sales, as Mr Whitehead has said, from the obligation to provide information and documentation on product risk and product origin.
The obligations of distributors, which have been a part of the directive since 1992, are formulated in a very generic and flexible way.
The only new requirement is that distributors, within the limits of their respective activities, are to safeguard and provide to the authorities on request the available documentation necessary for tracing the origin of products.
This does not imply that distributors should actively inquire about the origin of a product, but just that they should not destroy identification of the product and/or manufacturer and keep trace of any useful information available on the product origin.
This new requirement does not imply any substantial additional responsibility in the case of these kinds of shops.
Charity shops normally receive, as a gift, single used products which they in turn sell to consumers.
The nature of their trade is such that they could not be required to play a proactive part in product tracing.
In addition, the interest in terms of market surveillance of tracing the origin of single second-hand defective products is simply non-existent.
In conclusion, there is already a lot of flexibility in the requirements of the directive on distributors.
These requirements can be applied to these kinds of shops in a way compatible with the nature of their activities.
However, to meet the concerns raised and in order to further clarify the situation we could consider including in the recital dealing with this article a statement that it may prove impossible to provide the competent authorities with information and documentation on the possible risks and origin of the product in the case of isolated used objects donated by private individuals.
Secondly, Amendment No 3 proposes a deletion of part of the motivation for having clear conditions in the annex of the directive for the duty of business to inform the authorities about dangers.
This motivation is needed in order to prevent excessive bureaucracy.
Thirdly, Amendment No 4 proposes adding, in a preamble, a requirement that Member States draw up factual reports with the cooperation of competent and independent public or private institutions.
To require Member States to engage external institutions for this runs counter to subsidiarity.
Amendments Nos 6 and 29 require the Commission to consider approaches or submit a proposal relating to the safety of services in Amendment No 29 before a specified date.
The Commission is in fact already analysing and considering this issue, but it would go too far against the Commission's right of initiative to introduce this in the directive in such a prescriptive way.
Amendment No 7 proposes certain changes in the references to paragraphs.
The first part is acceptable to the Commission, but it is not common practice in Community legal texts to explain the content of articles referred to, as proposed.
To replace the word "producer" with "supplier", as proposed in Amendment No 11, would create more confusion than clarity, as there is no definition of supplier in the directive.
The definition of producer already covers suppliers whose activities may affect the safety properties of the product.
Amendment No 13 proposes adding a reference to the precautionary principle in the general obligation for producers to place only safe products on the market.
The precautionary principle is a general principle of risk management by the competent authorities and cannot be enforced as such as a direct obligation on producers.
The Commission does, however, share the view that the principle is important as a background for the revision of the directive, and a reference to this principle could therefore be made in the first recital of the directive.
Although the idea of publishing a full text of the European standards in the Official Journal, as proposed in Amendments Nos 14 and 16, is understandable, it would require fundamental changes in the relationship between the Community and the European standardisation organisations, probably implying higher levels of subsidies from the Community budget.
The reason for this is that the standardisation organisations own the standards and that most of them finance part of their activities through the sale of the standards.
This issue, with implications for most product-related Community legislation, cannot, therefore, be dealt with in the context of the current revision of this directive.
Amendment No 19 proposes harmonisation of Member States' monitoring approaches on the basis of guidelines prepared by the Commission and the consultative committee.
Although the Commission is in favour of cooperation and common principles, the proposed wording runs counter to subsidiarity.
To require Member States to take measures also in cases when business has already taken satisfactory measures to prevent a risk, which would be the consequence of the second part of Amendment No 21, is not acceptable.
This would also run counter to the objective of encouraging business to take proactive measures on its own initiative.
Amendment No 23 proposes the introduction in the directive of provisions on compensation in respect of damage.
These are civil law aspects, regulated by the directive on product liability, and should not, therefore, be dealt with here.
A requirement that the product safety network should be established within a specified time-frame is proposed in Amendment No 24.
Although the Commission is in favour of quickly establishing a network, this has to be agreed between the Member States.
It is therefore not realistic to set a time-frame.
The first part of Amendment No 27 proposes that only information related to the risks that have been established should be made available to the public.
This is not acceptable, as consumers should also have a right to obtain information on on-going investigations - provided that this information is not covered by professional secrecy in the manner that I described earlier and drawn narrowly.
Finally, Amendment No 28 proposes that the Commission should submit a report on the implementation of the directive every second year instead of every three years.
Although the Commission has sympathy for this idea, this cannot be done within the current limitations of the resources of the Commission.
The Commission cannot agree with most of the additional amendments proposed for the plenary session.
Allow me to explain first the Commission's position on the amendments to which we cannot agree.
Amendments Nos 30, 32, 42 and the main part of Amendment No 33 propose rewordings of the existing text of the directive which is not subject to revision.
No problems have been reported to the Commission with the existing wordings and the changes would weaken the provisions.
Amendment No 36 proposes that services directly associated with the product should be excluded except when provided by the original producer.
The discussions in Council go in the direction of dealing with the services within the definition of product which is, in fact, acceptable to us.
Amendment No 43 would totally exclude the application of this directive to products regulated by specific legislation.
This is not acceptable, as these directives often lack provisions on market surveillance, notification systems and so on.
A possibility of proving that a product conforms to the requirements through external certification is proposed in Amendment No 37.
Such certification can always be used for providing evidence but cannot, in itself, be regarded as foolproof.
Amendment No 38 proposes limiting the time period for emergency decisions to six months which is, in most cases, not sufficient for adopting permanent measures.
It also proposes an exemption from the export ban when the producer can show that the safety requirements of the receiving State are complied with.
This is not acceptable as products judged at Community level as posing serious risks and requiring rapid intervention should not be exported.
The amendment also proposes that the possibilities for parties to submit their views on a Community measure taken should be without prejudice to domestic remedies.
As this is not any type of appeal procedure, this seems unnecessary.
In addition, Amendment No 41 proposes that the export ban should not apply when a product has been banned while carrying out further checks.
This is a period during which there are real dangers of exports taking place.
If the checks confirm that the product is safe, the ban will automatically be lifted.
Amendments Nos 39 and 44 propose that information on dangerous products should only be available to the public once a banning or withdrawal decision has been issued and that exchange of information protected by professional secrecy should not be possible between market surveillance authorities.
As the consumer should also have the right to information about risks not yet firmly established, including in cases when the measure taken is not a ban or withdrawal, this is not acceptable either.
In addition, effective market surveillance cannot be carried out under the proposed limitations regarding confidential information.
Amendment No 40 proposes a deletion of the duty for business to notify the authorities about dangerous products they place on the market.
That is not acceptable as this is a key improvement in comparison to the existing directive.
Still on the notification obligation, we believe that to use the term "ascertain" instead of "conclude" for triggering the moment when information is to be notified, as proposed in the first part of Amendment No 34, will create more uncertainty than clarity.
Having extensively explained why the Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 1, 3, 4, 6, 8, 11, 13, 14, 16, 18, 19, 23, 24, 28 to 30, 32, 33, 36 to 43 and, in part, Amendment No 7, the second part of Amendment No 21 and the first part of Amendments Nos 27 and 34, I can inform you that the Commission can accept Amendments Nos 2, 9, 10, 12, 15, 20, 22, 25, 26, 31 and 35 and, in part, Amendment No 7, the first part of Amendment No 21 and the second part of Amendments Nos 27 and 34, as these amendments constitute an improvement and clarification of the Commission's proposal.
In the case of some of these amendments, however, in particular Amendments Nos 2, 15, 22, 25, 31 and the second part of Amendment No 27, further editorial changes might improve the text.
To conclude, I wish to thank again Mrs González Álvarez for the excellent report which can be supported by the Commission to a large extent.
Thank you very much, Commissioner Byrne.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place today at 11.30 a.m.
Membership of political groups
Ladies and gentlemen, we have a lot of votes to take, so can I please ask for a little discipline and cooperation?
Before we proceed to the vote, I wish to inform you that Mr Claudio Martelli of the Technical Group of Independent Members has now joined the Mixed Group, that is he has switched from the Technical Group to the Mixed Group.
Mr Martelli, normally you can only speak at the end of voting time, but I shall, exceptionally, give you the floor for a few moments.
There will not, however, be any discussion of this, but you can make a short personal statement.
Mr President, I have been a socialist in Italy and in international organisations for 30 years.
When I was re-elected to this Parliament in June 1999, I naturally joined the Group of the Party of European Socialists.
On 30 June 2000, at the end of a meeting of the Bureau, of which I was a member but where a few close colleagues discussed my case, in my absence and without my knowledge, Mr Barón Crespo informed me that I had excluded myself from his group.
I did not even receive a courtesy reply to my protest.
Clearly, Mr Barón Crespo feels that Italian Socialists may not be part of the Group of the Party of European Socialists.
One must either be a former Communist, such as Veltroni, or the satellite of a former Communist, such as Boselli.
This is the story of the Italian left, the story of the cuckoo: the ex-Communist cuckoo which, when its world crumbles, lays its eggs in the nests of other birds and, thanks to the mother's failure to care for her eggs, is able to eat the eggs which were originally in the nest.
Mr Martelli, you have had your minute.
Only one minute is allowed for a personal statement.
You can submit the rest in writing, to Mr Barón Crespo as well.
Mr President, I wish to categorically reject Mr Martelli's remarks.
Mr Barón Crespo spoke on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists in accordance with our statutes, and it is a matter for regret that Mr Martelli has now joined the European Right.
VOTE
Mr President, I would like to have an explanation of what you meant when you said "wir checken", as that word is not part of my German vocabulary.
Yesterday, Mrs Roth-Behrendt spoke about people who were "eingesqueezed" in a lift, that is "squeezed in".
As we are talking about our citizens' rights, I would like to know if we have ever adopted any amendments on the German language.
(Laughter, applause)
A typical example of English humour.
(Laughter, applause) Incidentally, you used the word "eingesqueezed" in German, and that is not correct German either! But nearly everyone understood what you meant, Mr Watson.
Report without debate (A5-0322/2000) by Mr Averoff, on behalf of the Committee on Budgets, on the proposal for a Council decision on the granting of funds to Greece in order to relieve the interest burden on EIB loans for the reconstruction of the region which was devastated by the earthquake of September 1999 (COM(2000) 632 - C5­0532/2000 - 2000/0255(CNS))
(Parliament adopted the legislative resolution)
Report (A5-0294/2000) by Mrs Eriksson, on behalf of the Committee on Women's Rights and Equal Opportunities, on the proposal for a Council Decision on the Programme relating to the Community framework strategy on gender equality (2001-2005) (COM(2000) 335 - C5-0386/2000 - 2000/0143(CNS))
(Parliament adopted the legislative resolution)President. So we finally have equal rights for women and men!
We will now interrupt voting time for the formal sitting.
(The sitting was suspended at 11.55 a.m. and resumed at 12.25 p.m.)
Report (A5-0309/2000) by Mrs González Álvarez, on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive on general product safety (COM (2000) 139 - C5­0224/2000 - 2000/0073(COD))
(Parliament adopted the legislative resolution)
Report (A5-0303/2000) by Mr Seppänen, on behalf of the Committee on Budgets, on the proposal for a Council decision amending Decision 2000/24/EC so as to establish an EIB special action programme in support of the consolidation and intensification of the EC-Turkey customs union (COM(2000) 479 - C5­0454/2000 - 2000/0197(CNS))
(Parliament adopted the legislative resolution)
Report (A5-0324/2000) by Mr Lagendijk, on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy, on the amended proposal for a Council Regulation concerning the European Agency for Reconstruction (COM(2000) 628 - C5-0526/2000 - 2000/0112(CNS))
After the vote on Amendment No 32:
Mr President, a misunderstanding seems to have arisen in connection with Amendments Nos 12 and 37, which we are about to vote on.
I do not think they are incompatible.
I would therefore urge you to vote in favour of Amendment No 12 and Amendment No 37 because taken together, they provide a sensible solution. So it is not a case of either/or, but both.
Mr President, before we start, may I point out that there is a mistake in the Greek translation.
It says, at the end of point 16, that negotiations are to take place under the aegis of ÍÁÔÏ.
It should say that negotiations are to take place under the aegis of the United Nations.
I should like to ask the services to correct this.
We can put a very quick question to the rapporteur about that.
But first we have another objection, from Mr Wurtz.
Mr President, my question relates to the order of the votes on the amendments concerning Paragraph 10, in other words, the genocide in Armenia.
As the vote was to have taken place yesterday, the voting sheet you prepared listed the votes in a different order, which was logical.
Today' s order is not logical.
So I suggest we draw up yesterday' s voting list again, in other words, to vote on Amendment No 13 first.
We have highly qualified people assisting us with our work.
There was a mistake in the original analysis, and that has been corrected now, but I would be grateful if the rapporteur, Mr Morillon, could briefly comment on these two points.
The first one was from Mr Katiforis about the word NATO, and the second question was about whether the present order is correct as shown.
Mr President, regarding the first question, it is quite clearly an error not of translation but of transcription.
As far as the order is concerned, I leave it to the discretion of the President to decide, and I repeat that I am against all three amendments.
That gives us an answer to both questions.
When we get to Amendment No 16 we should make sure that it is changed.
After the vote on Amendment No 7:
Mr President, in agreement with Mr Katiforis I would like to present the following text - I only have it here in English - which differs slightly from the actual text.
If I may just read it out:
"Welcomes the start of negotiations on confidence-building measures agreed on 31 October 2000, by the Foreign Ministers of both Turkey and Greece".
It is the start of the negotiations that we are welcoming here, not the outcome.
Unfortunately we are not in a position to welcome that yet.
(Parliament adopted the resolution)
Report (A5-0275/2000) by Mr Jové Peres, on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries, on the communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on Community participation in Regional Fisheries Organisations (RFOs) COM(1999) 613 - C5-0108/2000 - 2000/2068(COS))
(Parliament adopted the resolution)Explanations of vote
Motion for a resolution (B5-0845/2000)
- (EL) The Mediterranean has always been, and still is, a particularly sensitive region with serious political, economic and social problems.
Peaceful coexistence, mutually beneficial and balanced cooperation between countries and peoples, with no interference in their internal affairs, and smooth transnational relations have always been the mainstay of any cooperation between its countries.
The Mediterranean countries which do not belong to the ÅU have to cope with particularly acute problems of economic development and regional inequalities are becoming more and more marked.
The ÅU and its Member States bear a great deal of the responsibility for this state of affairs.
What we are witnessing is over-exploitation of natural and human resources by the developed countries, mainly the EU, and the companies established in them, in order to maintain and increase their foreign debt.
The attempt to export the EU economic and social model to the countries of the Mediterranean which do not belong to the EU and to integrate them into the new world order and so-called globalisation is the expression of colonial mentality.
It cannot provide a stable basis for cooperation because it seeks to impose the ways of the strong on the weak and to serve the interests of huge monopolies rather than the interests of the people and workers of the countries in the region.
The attitude of the Member States of the EU towards immigrants from these and other countries, making many of them feel insecure and at risk of deportation, failing to grant them equal rights with other workers, and maintaining ghettos of second-class citizens and victims of a modern slave trade is a typical example of this conduct.
The various embargos against, and even military intervention in, countries which refuse to toe the EU line and bow to the new world order are another typical example of Community policy. As is the fact that some countries are excluded from Euro-Mediterranean cooperation, others receive privileged treatment and money is distributed not on the basis of real need but of the interests of multinational capitalists.
Finally, we should not forget that we are talking about a region in which the EU and ÍÁÔÏ bombarded Yugoslavia and in which the ÅU, with ÍÁÔÏ's blessing, has conferred candidate status on Turkey, which is currently occupying 40% of Cyprus and contesting Greece's sovereign rights.
Nor should we forget our responsibilities towards the Palestinian people living in wretched conditions under a regime of Israeli state terrorism who continue to fight heroically for a homeland.
Unfortunately, the proposal for a resolution has failed to address these issues and has abided by the philosophy applied by the EU hitherto.
Its aim is to help European monopolies penetrate the area, obviously so that they can continue to plunder the wealth of the Mediterranean countries outside the ÅU.
That is why the MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece have voted against it.
The conditions for reinvigorating the Barcelona Process have not been fully achieved.
The delays in implementing the agreements can only be partly justified.
The responsibility is dual, lying with both the governments of the countries of the Union and the governments of the Mediterranean partners as well.
The Process is suffering from a lack of political will, which raises occasional doubts as to whether this major Mediterranean undertaking will be successful.
It is in consideration of this dual responsibility that I tabled amendments referring to the governments of the Euromed States.
If they do not assume their responsibility and make good their undertaking, there can be no project creating a multilateral sub-regional free trade area in the Mediterranean countries, as proposed at the Malta Conference in the context of south-south relations.
The question of financing also requires a will to succeed which has thus far not been displayed.
The proportion of the funds dedicated to all the different geographical areas, in respect for democracy, transparency and efficiency, needs to be re-established, and there needs to be lasting revitalisation of decentralised cooperation once a critical, in-depth analysis of the weaknesses and shortcomings noted in the implementation of the old programmes has been carried out.
With regard to respect for the dignity of legal immigrants, in the spirit of a harmonised European migration policy, in addition to legal instruments guaranteeing the fair treatment of immigrants, financial aid instruments need to be established for all those young people who wish to return to their native countries to start work when they have finished secondary education or a university course in a European country.
Coordination of Member States' initiatives in this matter is becoming essential and could be carried out by the European Commission.
Moreover, the Commission needs to present similar proposals regarding financial aid for young immigrants within the framework of the policy for cooperation with the ACP countries.
Another type of coordination concerns potential contributors - States and financial institutions - of international and regional aid, particularly in the Gulf countries.
A concerted programme of investment in the Mediterranean is becoming necessary.
Without joint action there can be no dynamism, and without dynamism there will not be sufficient drive for development.
I would like to end by stressing that by far the most effective means of achieving coordination would be a global Union strategy for the Mediterranean region.
Such a strategy will be able to establish the goals of an excellent partnership; such a strategy will provide the necessary justification for every initiative and each and every intervention; such a strategy will allow the partnership to become a vital means not only of ensuring the economic and social development of the Mediterranean region but also of enabling Europe to assume a stabilising role throughout the area.
This is why we will vote for the motion for a resolution.
Averoff Report (A5-0322/2000)
- I welcome this report by Mr Averoff on a proposal to grant funds to Greece in order to relieve the interest burden on EIB loans for the reconstruction of the Attica region which was devastated by the earthquake of September 1999.
This aid is more than justified in the light of that tragedy.
Eriksson Report (A5-0294/2000)
Mr President, I voted for this report, which lays down the action to be taken by the European Community in order to bring about genuine gender equality.
Before leaving to come to Strasbourg last Sunday, I met Mrs Rossi.
Mrs Rossi - who is a pensioner, a widow - asked me: "Why is it that, as a widow, the pension I receive is only half the amount that it used to be when my dear husband was alive?".
Now then, I would like to make it clear that, when we discuss gender equality, we should also concern ourselves with the pension laws which are discriminatory towards women.
The Member States must also respect women in their laws on widows' and married women's pensions.
Mr President, despite the progress made in recent years within the European Union, within this Europe that champions human rights, structural discrimination on the grounds of sex still exists.
Women do not enjoy the same rights as men, there are still fewer women representatives in public institutions and also at decision-making levels in private enterprise, and they are still the main victims of domestic cruelty and sexual violence.
I should like to highlight one point which frankly I see as a determining factor in this question: the lack of equality in the employment sphere.
There will never be equality if women do not have personal financial autonomy, if they have to depend on men for their support and to ensure their future.
What can most make women truly free and equal is to have the same opportunities of finding a job as men and not at a lower rate of pay.
I am convinced that the day when women achieve real financial independence through their work, then they will be truly free and all other inequalities will have disappeared.
- (EL) The proposed new five-year programme on gender equality is the most reactionary programme which has been dreamed up in recent years.
Its objective is to integrate women into the anti-labour policies of the ÅU.
The so-called equal opportunities policy has not reversed women's disproportionate share of unemployment, part-time employment and poverty, nor has it broken the glass ceilings of the centres of power.
Equal opportunities in the workplace, in society and elsewhere cannot be understood within the context of a set of reactionary policies which offend human dignity, a society in which there is unemployment, underemployment and no state welfare or a society which puts a price on and commercialises human values.
We are radically opposed to the way in which the terms "equal opportunities" and "equality" are used, because these two terms can only mean one thing in the context of capitalism: equal social misery for the majority of workers, which gets worse day by day, an equal share of poverty, the general rise in unemployment and part-time employment, cutbacks in public and free social services provided by the state and a heavier overall burden on the family.
Given the anti-labour policies of the ÅU, the specific objective and any positive measures promoted to achieve it will have just one purpose: to integrate women fully into EU policies, which have become even more reactionary to grass-roots interests.
The purpose of the text is to implement the more general policies of the ÅU and it clearly states that the policy of equality must promote the full integration of women into the "new economy".
In other words, their full integration on equal terms into part-time employment, into the reversal of full, stable employment and into the reduction of the non-wage costs of labour.
A genuine equal opportunities policy presupposes a different economic and social policy focusing on equal opportunities for men and women to share in prosperity, not an impoverished life, such as a reduction in the retirement age for both sexes to 60 for men and 55 for women, strengthening and upgrading the public and welfare sectors, abolishing the private health sector and abolishing part-time employment.
- (FR) We voted for this report because it recognises a certain number of principles on gender equality with which, I am sure, we all agree.
But all the declarations concerning 'equal opportunities for men and women' are cast in a rather garish light by the European directive authorising night work for women.
The ban on night work for women was one of those rare areas in which, by protecting women, the social legislation of certain countries was further advanced for female than for male workers.
On account of the fact that European institutions are incapable of combating the social segregation suffered by women in the areas of employment, salary and professional promotion and are therefore incapable of 'equalising opportunities' upwards, they 'equalise' downwards.
We are against the social regression represented by the authorisation of night work for women.
Night work in industry and, more generally, in the retail sector, which is just as detrimental to women' s as it is to men' s health, has no social or human justification.
The only reason why it is becoming widespread is the desire of companies to make ever greater profits.
In order to abolish social segregation, night work should be banned for men and women alike, with the sole exception of public services, notably hospitals and transport, where such work is socially useful. In this case, the inconveniences of working at night should be compensated for by a massive reduction in working hours, with protection for pregnant women.
.
(PT) Although somewhat belatedly, the Commission has presented its programme for the Community framework strategy on gender equality (2001­2005), which differs strikingly from previous programmes and, specifically, from the fourth action programme, which finishes at the end of this year.
In line with the proposal that has been presented, the aim of the change in methodology is to increase access and opportunities for non-governmental organisations to actively participate and contribute to the project.
If this is going to be possible, we must encourage this effective participation not just at Community level, but also in the Member States.
As the rapporteur states, it is important that the Commission considers the fact that a prerequisite of any genuine democracy is that all its citizens - men and women alike - should participate and be represented in equal measure in economic life, in decision-making forums, in social and cultural life and in civil society.
The Commission must nevertheless bear in mind that no work on gender equality will have a lasting effect unless women' s rights are improved, specifically in everyday practices in all spheres of activity.
. (DE) In order to ensure equality of opportunities between women and men in cultural, social and economic life, and to minimise and prevent discrimination on grounds of gender, the Commission has adopted a twin-track approach of which the Committee on Women's Rights and Equal Opportunities approves.
Special measures to help women should not be secondary; they should be integrated into policy.
In practice, initiatives are to be taken in five areas, including equality in economic life, equal participation and representation, and equal access to social rights.
EUR 53.5 million is provided for under budget item B3-4012.
This is a considerable but also necessary sum, which the Committee on Budgets has agreed to as a matter of political priority.
We would have liked to have scrutinised the fourth action programme just as we are now considering the fifth programme.
I very much hope that in future, by producing an annual review in good time, the Commission will enable this House to carry out a more in-depth analysis and hold a more thorough debate.
One more point about timing: this report contains many examples of ambiguous and infelicitous wording, because we have had to hold our debates and votes under extreme time pressure and the amendments were not available in all languages.
I have some reservations as far as the content is concerned.
For example, as so often happens in this House, studies are called for on the significance of a general reduction in working hours.We have adopted opinions by clear majorities recognising that the Member States can cope far better with flexible working hours than with unrealistic collectively bargained solutions.
Furthermore, I think that a "media code of conduct" is impractical.
Whenever woman are presented in a discriminatory way, the only thing that helps is forceful protests against each specific incident - protests by active readers of both sexes and by alert national and European Members of Parliament.
Nevertheless, I voted for the report because, on the one hand, various proposed improvements submitted by my group were taken on board, and also because the report calls for studies into the position of women in national labour markets and the inadequate access they have to social security systems, an area in which we need statistically relevant gender-specific data.
And it is quite right to call for consistency of the fifth framework programme with the Structural Funds, which are probably the most sustainable instruments the Community has, with the Community's EQUAL initiative and with the DAPHNE, STOP, PHARE and MEDA programmes.
I have voted in favour of compromise Amendments Nos 61-74, which were adopted together.
At the same time, I want to express my very great surprise at the view of children and elderly people, parents, family life and family unity, as well as of simple, decent love of thy neighbour, which comes to light in the following words to be found in the justification of compromise Amendment 72 on the subject of finding necessary resources for making it easier to reconcile working and family life, mainly by setting benchmarks for improved childcare and care of the elderly (which I interpret as also applying to care of children by their own parents in their own homes): 'The need for childcare and care of elderly family members form obstacles to women' s activity in professional, political or social spheres at various periods in their lives' .
It is mainly the words 'form obstacles to' and 'the need for childcare and care of elderly family members' which cause me deep concern.
Moreover, is 'activity in professional, political or social spheres' , to quote the justification, the highest good and only thing of value for individual human beings?
Is it this to which the political authorities attach the highest importance, while family life - the basic unit of society - and the intimate and human values associated with it are now also to be disregarded and devalued in this way?
- Regarding the Eriksson report (A5-0294/2000) on the proposal for a Council Decision on the Programme relating to the Community framework strategy on gender equality (2001-2005), I totally support gender equality but on examination of the related commission document, COM(2000) 335, it would appear that the financial statement includes "core funding of running costs of the European Women's Lobby (EWL) currently financed under budget line A-3037".
As you are aware, the Committee on Budgets has identified this NGO as a monopoly.
It would appear, according to correspondence from various European women's groups, that this monopoly does not ideologically represent a very substantial number of European women's organisations.
As this NGO plays an integral role in the formation and implementation of this programme, I believe the integrity of this Community framework strategy on gender equality is in question, and therefore unsupportable.
Furthermore, is it appropriate to fund a monopoly from a budget line intended to promote equality?
Indeed, are we justified in funding a monopoly from any EU budget line?
Regretfully therefore, I have voted against.
González Álvarez Report (A5-0309/2000)
Mr President, there are several reasons why I voted against the González Álvarez report but, in order to keep within the minute allowed for this explanation of vote, I will mention only one.
A lot of people came to the airport to see me off when I left to come to Strasbourg this time, including an elderly pensioner who, sadly, was suffering from a serious physical injury caused by a highly unsafe product on sale in the European Union.
As I left, I said to her, "Don't worry: we are going to debate the González Álvarez report which deals precisely with product safety".
However, I have realised that there is absolutely no provision in this report for a clear obligation for the rapid compensation of victims of dangerous products for their injuries.
- My party has serious reservations about Community law applying to the sale of consumer products, as against applying the concept of mutual recognition of standards.
Thus, we are opposed in principle to the original directive and must therefore oppose any extension of it.
Even if this was not so, we would still have serious reservations.
While this Commission proposal on general product safety is styled as a revision of the 92/59/EEC Directive, with claims that the approach followed in the original directive has not been altered, this does not seem to be entirely the case.
What particularly disturbs us are the plans revealed by Commissioner Byrne to develop a network of enforcement authorities to help implement this law.
Having seen proposals for "networks" elsewhere in Community initiatives, we see in this the beginnings of something which is altogether unhealthy - a unified enforcement system amounting to a European Union consumer law enforcement service.
This to us seems of a general trend where the Commission, having saturated Member States with its laws, is now taking altogether too keen an interest in enforcement systems, with an eye to direct control of them.
On this basis alone, my party opposes this measure.
- Whilst I support this report on general product safety, it is important that we do not go too far.
It is important that our products are safe, but we should not go over the top with extreme actions.
People across Europe are extremely concerned about the safety of consumer products, and rightly so.
This report welcomes an improvement in current European law on product safety, but in my view the directive should not be applied to charity shops, a key feature in the British high street.
It is absurd to think that the average charity shop can provide the authorities with information about product risks and product origin for second-hand goods acquired from the general public.
Let us not forget that it was my Labour colleague, Mr Whitehead, who introduced the amendments exempting charity shops, and we should congratulate him on his achievements.
The threat to charity shops occurred because it simply was not understood on mainland Europe.
It is now, and the Labour amendments offer a guarantee that charity shops will be left untouched and will be exempt from the directive.
The overall aim of the directive is extremely important in ensuring that there is a consistent and high level of consumer protection, as well as the efficient functioning of the single market.
I wholeheartedly support the drive for clearly-worded, understandable warnings about possible risks to be put on products where they are on sale.
Clear labelling is the best way of reassuring worried consumers that the goods they buy are safe.
Public confidence in the safety of products we all buy has taken a real knock in recent years following a number of scares, especially in children's toys.
Only by taking a safety first attitude - and being seen to take a safety first attitude - can public confidence and the safety of our children be restored.
Lagendijk Report (A5-0324/2000)
Mr President, the Council quite rightly hoped to rationalise EU aid to the Balkan states and to reform the European Agency for the Reconstruction of Kosovo, whose competence could gradually be extended to cover the entire region.
We fully support this approach and the two proposals for Council regulations which would implement it. But we cannot support the amendments tabled by the European Parliament which aim to profoundly upset the balance of the system in favour of the Commission.
Today, the European Agency for Reconstruction is administered by a Governing Board on which the representatives of the Member States and the Commission each have one vote and on which decisions are adopted by a two-thirds majority.
The Commission is not at all happy about a situation in which it is under constant supervision and complains that the weight of the Member States hinders its freedom of action and therefore, in its view, impedes the effectiveness of its assistance.
The European Parliament has rallied to the call of its old friend and has just voted for amendments in its favour.
Amendment No 5 proposes returning the running of the Agency to the Commission, which would be responsible to the European Parliament.
Amendment No 14 weakens the Governing Board vis-à-vis the Commission, by stipulating that its decisions are adopted by simple majority.
Amendment No 10 extends the tasks of the Agency, which is now effectively controlled by the Commission.
Finally, Amendment No 15 gives the Commission free rein in determining the rules governing the languages used by the Agency, about which we are very concerned.
We are witnessing the repetition of a classic scenario in which the Commission believes it will manage external aid better if it has more powers and more autonomy, and if it is less supervised by the Member States.
That is a mistake which, as we well know, could unfortunately take us down a very dangerous path.
We are therefore asking that the Member States retain the upper hand regarding the management of aid and the Agency.
In this way, they will exercise better control and they will maintain a vital link between European aid and national policies in this sensitive region.
Mr President, both as a member of the European People's Party and as a member of the Pensioners' Party in Italy, I was very happy to vote for this major report on European Union aid - and the management thereof - to Albania, Croatia, Bosnia, Montenegro, Serbia and Kosovo.
This aid will serve, above all, to help these countries feel that Europe exists and is particularly close to peoples who are the victims of war, war which has brought inconvenience and poverty, especially to the elderly and the infirm, who should be among the first to receive assistance.
I naturally support this report wholeheartedly.
Mr President, I voted for the report although it does not distinguish clearly enough between Kosovo, Serbia and Montenegro.
President Kostunica was happy to have himself compared with General de Gaulle in a recent interview. But General de Gaulle was only able to play a major role once he had settled the Algerian problem.
I believe that Serbia's "Algerian problem" is Kosovo.
Kosovo has the right to decide about its future independently and in partnership with its neighbours.
So we must give President Rugova and President Kostunica a chance to negotiate democratically with each other.
That is why we need early elections in Kosovo, cooperation in a spirit of partnership and an agreed solution for this region achieved in the same spirit.
- (EL) The remit of the European Agency for Reconstruction should have been extended to the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia a long time ago and should not be linked to the internal changes in Yugoslavia.
It was not Milosevic and his cohorts who paid the price of exclusion, the lack of international aid and the harsh post-war conditions; it was the civilians - or rather the most disadvantaged civilians.
Simplifying the decision-making process, creating decentralised operational centres (and not just in Pristina, which has gained in importance now that it has broken away from Yugoslavia) and dealing with the twin structure between the Governing Board and the Commission may prove to be the right moves in a bid to deal with the huge bureaucratic shortcomings at the European Agency for Reconstruction.
At the same time, we should:
1. Increase funding to this region, given that the European Union perpetrated and aided and abetted its destruction.
2. Ensure that local agents, seconded by bureaucracy and various European consultancy firms, have a say at central level.
3. Strengthen cooperation programmes between the former parties to the conflict and the countries in the region.
- I welcome this report which seeks to improve the delivery of EU assistance to the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia by simplifying the decision-making procedures and making them more transparent.
Garot Report (A5-0305/2000)
Mr President, I voted for the Garot report, although there are many gaps and inaccuracies which the Pensioners' Party does not support.
In particular, I would call upon the Commission to decide to put forward new, different types of proposals in order to resolve the problems suffered by agriculture and livestock farmers.
In fact, we cannot continue to assist those farmers who are in need of European Union subsidies - and long may they receive them - in the way we have done thus far, for it has achieved nothing but damage.
The quota system must be entirely abolished; we must find a different way of assisting agriculture, fisheries and livestock farmers in the European Union.
- (SV) We are not in favour of new subsidies for pig feed and are therefore voting against the report.
- (DA) The Danish Social Democrats have voted against a report designed to introduce aid for pigmeat producers in the EU.
The Commission has proposed introducing an aid scheme for pigmeat producers by establishing equalisation funds in the Member States.
The proposal is unnecessary and harmful because it introduces a new form of aid for a sector which has so far acquitted itself well without aid.
The crisis in the pig sector has resolved itself through the market economy, and precisely because unnecessary and expensive aid schemes have not been introduced.
Parliament' s report will introduce still more aid schemes.
Producers are to receive 100% aid from the fund to reduce their production, and the EU is to co-finance the scheme.
We are therefore voting against both the Commission' s proposal and Parliament' s report.
Once the vote has been taken, this report on the common organisation of the market in pigmeat will simply add to the tonnes of paper of common agricultural market legislation.
It is curious to observe how the rapporteur, albeit a supporter of the market economy, by talking of 'cyclical movements' in the market in pigmeat, attacks its 'harmful effects' in order to be moved by the 'havoc' it wreaks.
We are opposed to the market economy, which is just as stupid and disastrous in regulating the economy as a whole as it is in regulating the production of pigmeat.
However, we will not share the rapporteur' s cynicism, as he mourns the passing of the good old times when 'the cessation of activity by small production units was enough to restore prices' .
Even less do we share his view when he talks of the elimination of small producers which he, above all, uses to ask the European institutions for supplementary financing for large livestock producers.
We need to prevent producers falling victim to the cyclical variation of the market.
But the only true producers are those who work and run the pig farms, small farmers and agricultural workers, which definitely does not include those who are the primary focus of this report and who confine themselves to investing in this industry in order to make a profit with the aid of European Union grants.
.
(PT) A genuine reform of the COM for pigmeat is urgently needed in order to address the extended crisis that has hit producers in the European Union.
However, the Commission's proposal to create a voluntary regulatory fund financed solely by producers not only runs counter to the CAP principle of financial solidarity, it will also not solve any of the industry' s fundamental problems.
The Garot report is an attempt to improve on some aspects of the Commission' s proposal, by seeking to reach a compromise with the Council, specifically with regard to a financial contribution to the fund.
The problem is that, even if the French Presidency has shown a degree of openness, we know that the Commission has rejected these proposals and there does not appear to be a majority within the Council in favour of approving them.
It is therefore still crucial that we continue to fight for the mandatory establishment of the fund, financed completely by the CAP, and that payments from the fund should be adjusted to cover more producers, paying particular attention to small- and medium-sized farmers.
With regard to the overriding issue of the Community' s contribution to the fund, I also wish to point out that the proposals in the Garot report are an improvement as compared with the Commission' s position, but we still disagree with the idea of linking this contribution to the principle of CAP cofinancing which was, in fact, rejected in Agenda 2000.
. (DE) I doubt if anyone here will deny that pigmeat producers throughout the EU Member States have, over the last two years, been faced with a crisis which has had devastating consequences for many of them.
We do not have a market organisation for pigmeat comparable with those for other agricultural products.
And we do not fundamentally want to change that situation.
However, when there have been such major structural changes in a sector as there have been in the pigmeat sector, and when there has been a more sustained fall in prices, of up to 30%, than has been the case up to now, in that case some action is needed.
It cannot be in anyone's interest for smaller pig farming units in particular to have to give up because they cannot cope with this kind of on-going disaster scenario.
I therefore believe that there is a justification for modifying the present Community schemes in this area.
If it has already been accepted that regulatory funds should be created, then Community cofinancing should also be a possibility, as this would not stretch the Community budget as much as some people make out.
I therefore voted for the report.
, in writing. (FR) The Commission proposal, in itself, is a recognition of the inadequacy of the current tools used to regulate the markets.
The last crisis was exceptionally long and severe.
It caused the disappearance of smaller holdings and difficulties for a large number of young farmers.
The lack of a regulatory system accentuated this movement in favour of large, often integrated, production units.
It is not possible to ask producers alone to make an extra effort: many already belong to equalisation funds.
We believe we should support them by creating efficient tools not only to resolve the crises but also to better control the markets, improve quality and promote their products.
Pig farming is still essentially a family activity, based on responsibility.
It supports the economic activity of the rural community, often in regions where there are few alternatives.
We have chosen to fight in defence of a living and diverse rural world: maintaining small- and medium-sized enterprises, be they agricultural, industrial, or small-scale cottage industries, is the cornerstone of this.
The creation of a regulatory fund for pigmeat production, as amended, does not place the free market in the balance but will protect small family holdings.
- (NL) The pigmeat market is cyclical.
A slight variation in the supply is enough to spark a crisis situation.
However, the crises have been more drawn out in recent years and have had a terrible impact on young and small-scale pig farmers in particular.
The Commission is right to try and find ways in which to secure the income of pig farmers.
Unfortunately, the Commission' s present proposal will not yield structural solutions, and rapporteur Garot feels that the time has now come to dig out the old socialist instrument of robust state intervention again.
There is no point in setting up funds to ameliorate the effects of recurring crises.
There is a risk that these funds, by virtue of the cushioning effect they have, only make the crises more protracted.
In addition, such funds give Member States the opportunity, in the form of co-financing, to grant capped state aid to a greater or lesser extent.
Member States who have always been generous on the aid front can take advantage of this to distort competition.
This leads to situations worthy of a quote from George Orwell in the eleven official languages of the Union: "All pigs are equal but some pigs are more equal than others".
But even if the co-financing aspect was to be dropped from the proposal, the proposed fund would still not be in a position to address the frequency and depth of the crises in the sector.
When prices fall, production must be curtailed.
That is a natural reaction in the pig farming sector.
Therefore, a fund does not solve anything unless it is binding, and unless all participants endeavour to limit production.
These are the reasons we voted against the proposal.
Reducing production is the key to dealing with crises in the pig farming sector.
I therefore hope that the Council will study this report with a critical eye and take the view of Dutch pig farmers on board.
These farmers, who oppose an income fund in the first instance, feel that if the Council endorses a fund of this kind, it should do so with the proviso that each Member State limits its production.
Morillon Report (A5-0297/2000)
Mr President, I am very critical at this time when we have to decide upon relations between the European Union and Turkey.
Even though I voted for the motion, I would like to emphasise certain points which I feel that we should always bear in mind in this situation.
Firstly, it is not Europe which has asked to become part of Turkey but Turkey which has asked to join Europe, and Turkey must therefore adapt to and accept the rules which the European Union asks it to respect.
Secondly, Turkey is no longer alone against Greece but alone against the European Union.
Greece, which is no longer able to defend its rights and interests within our institutions, must be defended by the entire European Union.
Mr President, I voted for the motion and I was pleased to see that an amendment was adopted recognising the genocide of the Armenian people.
However, I regret that the amendments I tabled, which stressed the obligation of respect for the principle of the self-determination of peoples, were rejected.
This House is always talking about rights - the Charter was adopted yesterday - but when it comes to the application of these rights, not so much in practical terms but at least in terms of upholding them, Parliament takes alarming steps backwards which are certainly no credit to it.
Mr President, the Armenians' genocide was the first of many genocides in the twentieth century, which might indeed be called the century of genocide.
Franz Werfel created a literary monument to this genocide in his work "The Forty Days of Musa Dagh".
Franz Werfel had Jewish and German-Bohemian relatives.
The Jewish relatives were victims of the Holocaust, and the German-Bohemian relatives, some of whom were Jewish themselves, were driven out of Bohemia after the Second World War.
This goes to show that one disaster can trigger off the next.
When Hitler was preparing the Holocaust, he asked "who talks about the Armenians now?"
That is why we must tell our Turkish friends that wrongdoing cannot be hushed up today either.
We do not want to rub salt into historical wounds, we want to work together to right wrongs, no matter whose name they were committed in.
- (EL) Despite its serious shortcomings, the Morillon report is clearly an improvement on the Commission proposal as far as the partnership between the European Union and Turkey is concerned.
There is a positive reference to the Loïzidou case and the judgment of the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg.
Similarly, there is a positive, albeit inadequate reference to the Armenian question, in that Turkey should have been clearly called on to acknowledge the genocide - the amendments have, of course, done much to correct this.
Similarly, there is a positive reference to the Kurdish question and minorities - which the Commission draft accession partnership passes over in silence.
However, the main drawback and shortcoming of the Morillon report is on the issue of Greek-Turkish relations.
The European Parliament should make it clear to the Turkish Government that, if it wants to join the European Union, it must stop contesting the borders of Member States of the European Union and must refer any disputes to the International Court to be resolved.
This is also in the interests of the Turkish people who would like to live in peace with their neighbours.
Our vote in favour of the resolution should be interpreted as support for the fact that it represents an improvement on the Commission proposal and not as full agreement with it.
It is extraordinary that the European Parliament should be expressing an opinion on Turkey' s progress on the road to accession, especially when it comes to respect for human rights.
Because Sweden is not prepared to participate in a common military defence but only in civil crisis management, we cannot support Paragraph 15 which "welcomes Turkey' s determination to contribute to improving European capabilities within the framework of the common European security and defence policy" .
- (FR) The Morillon report on Turkey' s accession to the European Union serves, above all, to remind the Turkish Government that it must open up the Turkish market to European capital by carrying out 'structural reforms' ranging from 'dismantling state subsidies to reorganising pensions and accelerating privatisation' : in other words, by reducing social budgets and by making the living conditions of the most destitute sections of the population even worse.
As far as human rights are concerned, however, the report confines itself to 'encouraging the Turkish Government' , 'calling' on it to do better, without European countries ever threatening it, even if only to stop delivering arms.
The truth is that neither the rapporteur nor European governments want to offend the military who, in reality, govern Turkey and reduce a section of the country to a state of emergency.
European governments do not want to offend Turkish reactionaries who refuse to abolish the death penalty and trample women' s rights underfoot. Nor do they want to offend the Turkish authorities who now oppress the Kurdish people after having already massacred the Armenian population.
Let those who are interested only in the movement of capital and goods and not life and human rights vote for this report.
We voted against it.
- (FR) Ladies and gentlemen, today' s debate is not about reopening old, historical wounds, which have not completely healed.
It is not about rekindling ancestral hatreds or blowing on the embers of intolerance, as I have heard talk of in this Chamber.
What is at stake is not even the acknowledgement of the reality of Armenian genocide, since this House has already had occasion to express its views on this, most notably in its resolution of June 1987.
What the Members of the European Parliament asked of Turkey in 1987 was to have the courage to open its eyes to the past so as to be able to look to the future.
Historical truth is the guarantor of democracy. It must not and cannot suffer specific financial or economic interests, be they of individuals, governments or states.
Truth and remembrance are not negotiable.
It is enough to remember what happened in Germany, which recognised the Shoah and which, after the Second World War, became a major democratic country.
This is what we are hoping for once again today when we call upon the Morillon report to make reference to genocide.
Acknowledging genocide must be a call for dialogue to be established between the new Armenian and Turkish generations.
The whole of the Armenian community and the Armenian children who fled into exile at the beginning of the century to the countries of Europe are today waiting for justice to be done.
They want to offer a memorial to their ancestors, the victims of genocide.
At a time when the last witnesses of exile, the last survivors of the carnage, are quietly passing away, the work and the duty of remembrance are even more necessary.
But beyond the duty of remembrance which we must demand from all democracies, and the people of Europe know just how difficult and painful a task this is, so difficult in fact that some European countries have not yet completed it, it is incumbent on us to ensure that such acts of barbarism, which destroyed lives for ethnic, religious and cultural reasons and which offend the conscience of the world, never recur.
Europe must spread this message.
- (FR) It was at the European Council meeting in Helsinki in December 1999 that the European Union decided to grant Turkey the status of candidate country for accession to the European Union and to establish an accession partnership and a single financial framework with a view to helping Turkey's application to progress in accordance with the Copenhagen criteria.
It is a sine qua non that these criteria are met before the accession negotiations can start, and we must never forget this.
The progress reports established by the European Commission are therefore extremely important.
Today we are discussing the 1999 progress report.
Following the example of the rapporteur, we are bound to admit that Turkey has progressed on certain levels and that there are positive signs.
I am primarily thinking of the resumption of the political dialogue in the Association Council, which met on 11 April 2000 after being suspended for three years, and the establishment of eight subcommittees entrusted with the task of setting priorities for incorporation of the acquis communautaire, the signature by Turkey on 15 August and 8 September 2000 of four important UN conventions, on political, civil, social and cultural rights respectively, which must be ratified as soon as possible so that human rights and democratic pluralism may be guaranteed in that country, the Turkish Council of Ministers' adoption of the report presented by the Turkish Supreme Coordination Council for Human Rights, as a 'reference working document' , even if practical measures to protect the rights of minorities need to be added, and the adoption of the law on adjourning trials and deferring sentences for press and radio broadcasting offences.
But there are still many areas where progress is unsatisfactory, or indeed non-existent.
I am thinking in this case of the absence of a law abolishing the death penalty, the Cyprus question and the occupation by the Turkish army of one third of the island of Cyprus, and the problem of the rights of minorities, such as the Kurdish and Armenian minorities.
In this connection, I supported an amendment aimed at inserting into the body of the report a reference to the genocide in Armenia, because it is important to acknowledge this historical reality.
I invite the Turkish authorities to do the same: this would mark a great step forward in the country' s progress towards democracy.
If Turkey wants to enter into accession negotiations, it still needs to make a great deal of effort.
If it wants to accede to the European Union, it will have to integrate all the values which make Europe what it is.
This once again raises the question of whether Turkey really wants to be a Member of the European Union, or whether it would prefer to organise an integrated 'whole' with other Middle East countries, which would have very close links with the European Union at the commercial and economic level, at the security and stability level and also at the human rights and democratic rules level.
This is, of course, a different debate to the one we are having today. But, given the importance I attach to Turkey, I wanted to restate my case today.
- I and my colleagues have opposed this amendment because Leyla Zhana is insisting that she is not herself asking for special treatment or immediate release from gaol.
She wants the penal law changed, as do we.
Moreover, we believe that not only Kurdish, but all political prisoners should be freed.
I voted for this motion for a resolution.
I am delighted that the European Parliament has openly committed itself to encouraging the Turkish Government and the Turkish Grand National Assembly to publicly acknowledge the genocide that the Armenian minority was subjected to before the establishment of the modern state in Turkey.
Parliament had already undertaken the road to recognition as early as 1987, and the adoption of this amendment demonstrates Parliament' s consistency in this area.
However, this resolution does not answer what is a real question: what borders do we really want for the European Union?
- (NL) Perhaps there will come a time when EU enlargement will head further eastwards, through the accession of the Ukraine and Russia.
Obviously Turkey will then have to be given the same opportunity.
But that day is in the distant future.
Present-day Turkey is an authoritarian state with superior military power, political prisoners, censorship, party bans, border conflicts and an electoral system that excludes minorities.
Lessons still have not been learnt from the mass murder, eighty years ago, of the insurgent Armenians.
That partly explains why people do not think it untoward that a different national minority is still being deprived of its rights to this day.
The Kurds are displaced, bombarded and suppressed. Their language is banned from use in administration, education and the media.
Turkey must first learn from the histories of Greece, Serbia, Bulgaria, Albania, Syria, Iraq and Yemen.
These countries came under Turkey' s dominion in the past, and uprisings that took place there were repeatedly suppressed using violent means.
Since the people are no longer prevented from exercising their right to self-determination, this has enabled peace to take hold.
I do not believe that Turkey' s style of government will change by us presenting this country with the prospect of EU membership, subject to flexible conditions.
The necessary changes cannot be bought outside by the governing powers; they must come from within.
.
(IT) Turkey must become an integral part of the European Union as soon as possible, for this will both contribute to the fight against fundamentalism and the peace process and improve development and stability between the countries of northern and southern Europe.
Sadly, many issues are still unresolved such as those related to the Kurdish and Armenian situations and to full respect for civil rights, although a great deal of progress has been made in these fields.
The dignity of peoples and respect for traditions are foundation stones of the Union, which cannot be content with mere declarations of principle regarding the Kurdish and Armenian situation.
The Union must be more proactive and treat enlargement to include Turkey as a vital geopolitical strategy.
We therefore also renew our invitation to the Turkish Government to make a formal admission of Turkey's responsibility in the extermination of the Armenian people.
This declaration, which is necessary from the moral and historical perspective, is an obligatory condition for Turkey's accession to the Union.
For these reasons, Alleanza Nazionale, which has already, in the past, declared itself to be in favour of enlarging the Union to include Turkey, will abstain from today's vote, as a further invitation to the Turkish Government and the Turkish people to take steps to resolve these issues with all haste.
-(FR) We are facing a terrifying danger, and that is forgetting.
We need to remember the horrors of history if we do not want to relive them.
The genocide in Armenia is one such horror and such suffering can only be alleviated if it is recognised.
Recognition of the genocide in Armenia is a recognition of the dignity of the individual.
We cannot forget the deportation of the entire Armenian population to the deserts of Mesopotamia, the deportation of the Armenians of eastern Anatolia in 24 hours, the shooting of able-bodied men, the persecution of women, children and old people, who covered hundreds of kilometres on foot, without medical care and without food, divested of their belongings, raped, their throats slit on the open road, the deportation in 1915 of the Armenians of Cilicia and eastern Anatolia, the assassination of 600 Armenian prominent citizens in Constantinople, the extermination of more than a million Armenians in just over a year - in other words, almost half the Ottoman Armenians.
All the accounts bear witness to the same ordeal of the civil populations of Armenia.
I remember the 1987 resolution which called on Turkey to acknowledge the Armenian genocide as a precondition to its accession to the European Union.
I voted today for the amendments calling for this acknowledgement in order to keep this testimony alive and to acknowledge a people' s suffering.
Turkey will gain in stature among nations when it agrees to face up to its past.
- (FR) What the Morillon report shows us is quite simply the fact that we are still paying for the absurdity of the decision adopted at the European Summit meeting in Helsinki which regarded Turkey, on an equal footing with Poland, as a fully European country destined to join the European Union with all the practical implications this entails (pre-accession strategy and so on).
I remember the exact text of the conclusions of the Presidency in Paragraph 12: "Turkey is a candidate country destined to join the Union on the basis of the same criteria as applied to candidate countries" .
We all know that, in reality, this decision was tainted with hypocrisy.
Nonetheless, the system that has been put in place will do its work and will impose its logic on us until the time comes when this awkward position will become so untenable that our relations with Turkey will be in serious and deep crisis.
But, some might say, we can make the pleasure last, we can multiply the conditions and infinitely draw out the Copenhagen criteria in order to delay the moment when we have to take up the subject of the free movement of workers with Turkey.
Such ulterior motives are unworthy of Europe and unworthy of Turkey.
In our relations with the Turkish nation and the great Turkish people, we must use the language of frankness and respect, not a double talk which opens the door to the worst kind of disappointment and unacceptable humiliation.
It is absolutely not a question of pushing Turkey away from Europe, as Cohn-Bendit claims.
It is simply a question of recognising that geography and history have made present-day Turkey a country that is not European.
In the face of stark realities, it is about fully respecting the dignity of the Turkish people by not seeking to impose on it a behaviour which it must adopt of its own accord, and by seeking to jointly develop close cooperation.
The ambiguity of the pre-accession procedure prevents real cooperation between Turkey and Europe from developing along healthy and clear lines, even if there is a powerful common interest for Turkey - with its influence and weight and the privileged relations it now has with the Turkish-speaking countries of central Asia - to be a powerful stabilising factor in a region which is in great need of stability.
- On behalf of the European Parliamentary Labour Party, I welcome Mr Morillon's report.
We believe that Turkey should be treated the same way as any other applicant country.
While it is clear that Turkey does not yet meet the Copenhagen criteria, we should be working closely with them to achieve that objective - just as we have done with all the other applicants.
We cannot consistently seek new obstacles to put in their path.
We opposed the amendments on the Armenian massacre for exactly this reason.
That event took place during the time of the Ottoman Empire.
I do not recall events which took place during the British Empire being used to obstruct the United Kingdom's accession.
Consistency and honesty should be the hallmarks of our dealings with any applicant country.
Jové Peres Report (A5-0275/2000)
Mr President, as you are aware, the news is spreading throughout the world of fish that I am promoting their cause.
In fact, the fish are extremely concerned about the mad cow disease crisis and, having heard about Mr Jové Peres' report - which is rightly concerned with the fact that we are not able to monitor how many fishing boats go to fish in one area and how many in another - they have proposed that I put it to the Commission that it would be appropriate to fit these fishing boats with remote tracking devices - which are present on many cars - so that the European Union will be able to discover how many fishing boats fish in one area of the sea and how many in another.
This would avoid there being too many fishermen in one place, for the fish would also like to be left to live their lives in peace and become pensioners as well.
in writing.- (FR) We voted against the Jové Peres report on Community participation in the Regional Fisheries Organisations because it calls for the transfer of national sovereignties, which would be completely counterproductive.
For a number of years, as a member of the delegation for relations with Canada, I have been able to observe the operation of one of the regional organisations, NAFO (Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organisation), whose members are the countries of that region, including Canada, as well as all the countries that use traditional fishing zones in the region, including France, Spain and some other European countries.
Every member country has a vote in the decision procedure.
Now, from the moment the European nations concerned decided to communitise this issue and to be represented solely by the Commission they have just had a single vote.
So the first effect of the uniting of our forces was to reduce the number of our votes from six to one.
The countries of Europe, as a whole, have the same number of votes as Cuba, for example.
This situation does not worry the federalists for whom, when the Commission speaks with a single voice, we gain in strength.
Unfortunately, it is 'with a single voice' in all senses of the phrase.
What is more, our position is often weakened by our internal mechanisms, notably prior alignment to the lowest common denominator.
On the whole, our interests are undermined, they are not defended with the necessary force, and the role of the Commission is primarily that of a police officer vis-à-vis Member States to get them to apply the binding decisions that have been adopted, sometimes in spite of themselves, in the regional organisation in question.
The Jové Peres report would not only like to regularise this situation for existing regional organisations and those that are in the process of being established, it would also like to reinforce it by putting paid to the Commission' s habit of calling on the support of technical experts from different Member States.
According to the report, the Commission would need to recruit staff as a result and would be given the corresponding funds.
We cannot accept any of these approaches.
We believe that the current system of representation by the Commission weakens instead of strengthens us, and we want every European nation to be fully represented within the regional fisheries organisations, even though it is clearly desirable that the Member States coordinate their positions.
- Although the Jové Peres report is ostensibly about fisheries, I see in it a much more sinister agenda.
For instance, one sees such statements as: "... the development of a genuine fisheries policy requires that the powers of monitoring fishing activity must be assigned to the Commission"; "...the establishment of a proper Community system of monitoring fisheries is bound to entail a degree of sovereignty being transferred to the Union institutions"; and "... the European Union is not a confederation of states but a 'sui generis' entity in international law, in which ... there is a desire for economic, social and political integration...".
Then there is the observation that: "the lack of adequate human and material resources means that the Community's powers are delegated to Member States...", with the view that this situation cannot be extended indefinitely.
The rapporteur's answer is for the Community to be given the resources, effectively, to take direct control over fisheries monitoring.
This reveals the European Union's true ambition - the continued acquisition of powers until it becomes an all-powerful superstate.
It will only be content when its own gunboat fleet, flying "ring of stars" flags, is enforcing its fisheries policies.
My party cannot support this report.
. (IT) The European fishing sector is currently suffering a series of challenges due to an increase in competition caused by the globalisation of the fish products market.
There is also a clear need for greater protection of the marine environment and rational management of exploitable fisheries resources.
In this context, it appears necessary to increase international cooperation and ensure that the Community consolidates its undertaking to define a law on fish stocks.
The principle tool for achieving closer cooperation is the Regional Fisheries Organisations (RFOs), which play a key role on the international scene but which lack the human resources for the Community to be adequately represented.
The RFOs are particularly suitable for achieving the objectives established because of their regional nature, but, above all, they contribute to the rational management of resources by reflecting the specific characteristics of the fishing areas.
In this context, considering the importance of RFOs for the future of the common fisheries policy and the different levels of organisation, competences and development of each organisation, the Community needs to adapt its participation according to their respective characteristics and to harmonise its role within the 30 existing RFOs, in order to speed up transposal of the recommendations adopted by the RFOs into Community law.
- (FR) Without going back to the excellent argument put forward by Mr Gallagher regarding the text that has been submitted to the vote, I would like to extend the debate to cover all cases where our countries are represented by the executive Commission in international negotiations.
My comments naturally apply to the issue before us today, the representation of the European Community within regional fisheries organisations, but they apply equally to talks conducted for example within the World Trade Organisation.
If the Commission has the power to represent the Community and to negotiate in an international context, it is because it has received a mandate from the Council.
It is therefore important that this mandate is defined clearly in terms of time and content and that it is strictly monitored by the Council.
In a good many cases, such as fishing in certain regions of the world, the interests of Member States are not uniform.
Some Member States are not at all involved in certain fishing regions.
It is therefore vital that the Member States that are directly involved can defend their own interests by sitting at the negotiating table with the Commission at their side playing a useful technical support role.
Otherwise, the influence and the weight of Europe in such negotiations would be weakened if the interests of Europe were represented in a manner intended exclusively to benefit the Commission.
Europe would, in fact, have just one seat and the position that would be defended would be nothing more than the lowest common denominator established on the basis of the positions of a group of Member States who are involved to varying degrees.
What is important therefore is not to satisfy the Commission' s desire for domination by weakening the position of Europe, which would be in direct conflict with the correct application of the principle of subsidiarity.
On the contrary, in all international negotiations in which the European Union is involved, it is important to begin by strictly defining the Commission' s role, which should by no means be to replace Member States, but to support and coordinate alongside the Member States concerned.
I am not a hundred percent certain that this is the path the Nice Summit is preparing to take ... but there is still time for Member States to regroup.
That brings us to the end of voting time.
I would like to thank those who have stayed to the end!
(The sitting was suspended at 1.27 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m.)
Waste incineration
The next item is the report (A5-321/2000) tabled by Mr Blokland, on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council directive on the incineration of waste [C5-0371/2000 - 1998/0089 (COD)].
Mr President, when I was appointed rapporteur for the amendment of a directive concerning the incineration of hazardous waste, three years ago, I could not have suspected what it would lead to.
A small subject grew into an extensive piece of work owing to the fact that proposals on hazardous and non-hazardous waste were combined in a single directive.
My suggestion that we should include them in one directive was supported by the then President-in-Office of the Council, Mr Trittin, and by the Commission, which meant that Parliament' s motion to amalgamate three directives did not meet with a great deal of opposition.
The amalgamation had the effect of streamlining Community legislation.
Things did not go as swimmingly for Parliament' s amendments from first reading, as the Council rejected most of them.
A chastened Parliament confined itself to adopting sixteen amendments at second reading.
The need for conciliation soon became apparent because, as it turned out, the Council was not minded to adopt these amendments.
In order to avoid a costly and exacting official conciliation procedure, informal negotiations were opened in order to see if a compromise could be reached.
However, Parliament' s willingness to expedite the procedure demanded flexibility on the part of the Council.
That proved to be a sticking point on account of the divergent positions.
Ultimately, after some tough negotiating, an outcome was achieved that is worth defending.
As rapporteur, I do so with utter conviction.
Throughout the entire period, I was able to work well together with the representatives of the Council and the Commission, and was secure in the knowledge that I had the support of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy and its secretariat.
I would like to sincerely thank all concerned.
I would like, just one more time, to give three reasons as to why the directive on waste incineration is so important.
Firstly, the emission of dioxins, as well as the emission of other harmful substances will be drastically reduced.
Secondly, the public will have far better access to information about incineration plants.
Thirdly, it will substantially reduce the disparity between the requirements governing incineration plants and those governing plants for the co-incineration of waste, such as cement kilns.
But although I am upbeat about the outcome of this directive, it cannot conceal the fact that waste incineration is an emergency solution.
After all, we have not managed to avoid the production of waste, nor have we succeeded in introducing recycling.
Fortunately, there is talk of progress on the technological front, where the emphasis must be on sustainability.
I will give you an example: PVC comprises 0.7% of the total amount of incinerated waste.
According to the Commission' s Green Paper, incinerating PVC waste gives rise to a number of problems.
We must get straight down to tackling these problems, leaving no stone unturned.
Sustainable technology could prove helpful to us in the process.
Finally, I anticipate our being able to tighten up the waste incineration directive in a few years' time, in close consultation with industry.
The people who live in the vicinity of these plants will thank us for it.
Mr President, I share at least one certainty with the rapporteur, Mr Blokland: incineration may be a significant source of pollution but it is in fact necessary today, given the very low levels of waste recycling.
The urgency of this subject is made more acutely felt by the problem of animal meal in feedingstuffs, which we are going to be debating later this afternoon, which are going to have to be destroyed.
The objective of this proposal, which aims to replace three directives relating to waste incineration, is to improve air, water and soil quality and human health by reducing emissions of pollutants linked to incineration and co-incineration, notably dioxins, furans and heavy metals.
This proposal also allows for the integration of the technical progress that has been achieved since the 1990s.
Overall, the result of the conciliation process is very pleasing.
The emission limit values for incineration and co-incineration plants have been brought into line, while taking account of the technical differences between these two activities.
I have always been in agreement with the joint draft which regards these two systems as complementary and not competing.
Today, we cannot do without either of these incineration methods.
Yet one can only regret the fusion of these incineration processes in terms of hazardous and non-hazardous waste, which has considerably complicated the debate, and which I have always condemned.
In my view, the working method is not good, and I believe it is undesirable that we behave in this manner on such issues.
Nonetheless, we are satisfied with this third reading, because it reinforces the operation authorisation conditions.
Our group, which wanted to avoid the confusion between hazardous and non-hazardous waste, recognises that the current text clearly provides for different recovery and treatment processes, which are adapted to the types of waste involved.
Supplementary precautions will have to be taken as far as hazardous waste is concerned.
Mr President, I would like to conclude by saying that the Group of the Europe People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats is satisfied by the work that has been carried out during the course of the third reading.
Mr President, first of all, I think we have cause to thank Mr Blokland, the Commission and the Council for the cooperation there has been in connection with the directive.
We all know that it has been a long and very difficult process putting together the requirements for the incineration of both hazardous and non-hazardous waste.
I want to draw attention to just three important objectives we can achieve by means of the directive.
First and foremost, a significant contribution has now been made to reducing discharges of hazardous and polluting substances produced by incineration - substances which are very harmful to people' s health and which damage the environment.
This is to happen by means of the operational requirements made in connection with incineration plant and also by means of the emission limit values we have now established for heavy metals, dioxins and other substances.
I also think, however, that it is very important to emphasise that it is now no longer merely a question of discharges into the atmosphere but also of discharges into the water and the earth.
The second thing I want to point out is that, as Mr Blokland too mentioned, people are now to be given more information about emissions from incineration plant in the form of the annual reports that are to be prepared.
I think this is a very important result.
People are entitled to be told about these things.
Finally, I want to emphasise that, by establishing the common requirements which everyone must now fulfil, we can presumably get rid of a significant proportion of so-called waste tourism.
It will no longer be so financially attractive to export waste to other places in the Community where waste handling requirements are less strict.
As Mr Blokland mentioned, incineration is, of course, far from being the ideal way of disposing of waste.
It is important for us to continually invest in better production methods, recycling and re-use.
This ought clearly to be given priority ahead of incineration.
It is nonetheless good that we have now obtained tighter rules covering waste incineration.
I believe this will prove to be a significant contribution to improving the environment.
Mr President, I would also like to thank Mr Blokland for preparing this subject.
It has been a difficult process drafting the directive, as circumstances and practices in the Member States vary, and this affects many different interest groups.
The end result is that we now have a reasonably balanced proposal for imposing strict limits regarding the incineration of hazardous and non-hazardous waste, improving the environment and enabling waste to also be used in the production of electricity and heat.
One of the hardest problems was to define what co-incineration meant.
In some countries the best alternative, environmentally speaking, is that carefully sorted combustible waste can be burned in small municipal plants that produce electricity and heating.
In the first draft sketches for these plants there was a call for unnecessary, technically costly and, in some respects, impossible tests.
The proposal has improved during the debate.
It is also important that industry can still use non-hazardous waste in its own production of energy.
In my opinion, the problem was also that the directive went into precise technical detail which it was hard to get unambiguous opinions on from the experts.
I think we in Parliament should keep to the definition of the main arguments, allowing Member States to take account of differing circumstances and continue with best practice with regard to the environment.
A directive on the incineration of waste will increase the costs of burning waste, but will cut hazardous emissions and improve the state of the environment.
Our parliamentary debate achieved a reasonably balanced proposal that can serve as a basis for action throughout the Union.
Mr President, I would like to congratulate Mr Blokland for his excellent work on this report and give my group's support for the compromise text.
With the toughening of legislation on landfill there has been significant increase in waste incineration, and I know from my own experience in my constituency in Wales that incineration of hazardous and non-hazardous waste is as much a concern, in terms of its effects on health and the environment, as is landfill.
It is essential that we do not replace one unhealthy and unsustainable form of waste disposal with another.
Incineration is not recycling.
It is not a clean and safe method of waste disposal.
Genuinely sustainable alternatives must be funded and promoted and far more must be invested in research and in developing waste prevention, re-use and recycling.
That is why I welcome these standards for co-incineration of municipal waste and the transportation of waste, which should help bring an end to the present trade in waste where areas with the cheapest operators and the lowest standards become the co-incineration capitals of Europe.
In particular, I welcome the commitment to improving public access to information on incineration plants and the obligation on plant operators to publish an annual report on emissions.
Greater openness is obviously of major concern to people who live near these incinerators, but it will also help to ensure that the plant operators themselves keep below the emission ceilings that have been set.
The introduction of much stricter nitrogen oxide limits for new co-incineration plants such as cement kilns is also a step forward which will be an incentive for reducing emissions even though the standards proposed do not reflect the best available techniques.
Overall, this much needed legislation will put in place safeguards to limit the worst effects of incineration on health and the environment and, I hope, discourage incineration-for-profit, which depends on the creation of more and more waste.
Mr President, I would like to thank Mr Blokland in particular for his cooperation during this process.
Agreement on the derogations in the scope of the directive was one of the hardest questions in the debate and conciliation process.
The aim was for strictly limited derogations and the clearest possible definitions.
In my opinion this has been successful, meaning that ecological targets and compatibility with other Community policies can come about in what is actually an easily realisable way.
Parliament was also pushing for greater transparency and better opportunities for the public to have access to information.
Thus, in the conciliation process we were able to agree that plants that incinerate more than two tons per hour should publish a report on their emissions each year and smaller incineration plants should be included in the lists that would come under public scrutiny.
The limit values for emissions in the annex to the directive were definitely the most difficult point.
In this respect the conciliation process achieved a good result, as Parliament' s proposal for stricter nitrogen oxide emissions in all new cement kilns co-incinerating waste was approved.
I myself succeeded in having some amendments made to the report, vital for the continuation of co-incineration practices that have been in place in Finland for years and which are more ecological than those contained in the directive that is now about to be approved.
I am very happy about that, as the job I had as a new member having come directly to the second reading was not easy.
The report by Mr Blokland, now at its third reading, was for many members of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, elected to Parliament for the first time, the first real test of learning with regard to parliamentary practice.
The procedures chosen by the institutions work surprisingly well, however.
The end result can be considered good, and with good reason.
The important element in all this, though, was the genuine desire for cooperation on the part of the three institutions.
The work of the countries to hold the presidency, Portugal and France, was constructive, and we have to mention in particular the role of the Commission, which played a decisive part in bringing about a satisfactory end result.
In my opinion, there is something to be learnt from this for the future and we must see to it that cooperation to achieve a more ecological European Union works.
Mr President, honourable Members, forgive me - especially Mr Blokland - for being a few minutes late.
I could not hear your introduction, but I can guess what was in it.
First of all, I want to thank you for your excellent work as rapporteur on this report.
The fact that this directive has passed through the legislative procedure so smoothly serves to show how important it is for all concerned.
This directive will lead to significant reductions in emissions in several key pollutants across the European Union, despite the fact that the volume of waste incineration will increase over the coming years.
Not only does it contribute to the fight against air pollution but it also covers the release of waste water, as Mr Lund has said, from exhaust gas cleaning and the quality of waste from the incineration process itself.
The conciliation process was demanding, but a well-balanced compromise has been found and the amendments of Parliament and the Council have produced a better directive.
The scope of the directive is much clearer.
Public access to information has improved.
Stricter emission-limit values have been introduced for new cement kilns that co-incinerate waste, as Mrs Evans pointed out.
This has been largely due to the excellent work of the European Parliament and its rapporteur, Mr Blokland.
I am convinced that the joint text strikes the right balance - a view reflected in your speeches yesterday - incorporating a high level of environmental protection along with the legitimate interests of all stake holders.
Let me remind you that the directive is only one instrument in the whole waste-management concept of the Commission.
Burning waste is the final stage in the treatment of waste, due to the waste hierarchy, and the Commission will make strong efforts to reduce and recycle waste and in its approach to an integrated product policy.
Of course, the overall objective is to prevent waste in the first place.
In conclusion, this directive is a major contribution to the reduction of negative effects on the environment and the risks they pose to human health.
Thank you, Commissioner.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.
Supplementary health insurance
The next item is the report (A5-0266/2000) by Mr Rocard, on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs, on supplementary health insurance [2000/2009 (INI)].
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, for almost ten years now the Community institutions have been working on the issue of social protection, a major element of which is, quite clearly, health cover.
Today, Member States, while retaining their own responsibilities through the direct application of the subsidiarity principle, nevertheless have problems in common which justify a debate at European level.
The operation of social systems is directly affected by certain general trends including the unemployment and social exclusion generated by 25 years of low economic growth, which has restricted the overall potential tax yield, the ageing of the population, the consequence of the emergence of new diseases and, finally, increased health care costs due to advances in medical research and treatment.
However diverse national situations may be, one can recognise in all Member States a more or less general reduction in statutory cover, an enhanced role for supplementary health insurance schemes and a marked increase in discriminating factors.
Against this backdrop, a more global approach to health protection seemed to me to be necessary, taking account, of course, of the institutional context: responsibility for the organisation and financing of social insurance systems by the Member States; national social models shaped by history, and free competition governing the rules applicable to the insurance industry.
Providing guaranteed access for all European citizens to high-quality necessary medical treatment within reasonable time limits is a primary objective towards which the efforts and financing of obligatory and supplementary systems must converge.
Starting from the principle that every individual has a right to medical care and that healthcare is a social good to which all Member States must provide access, it is unacceptable that some are forced to simply abandon healthcare, allowing unwholesome systems to take their place which are disastrous for our societies.
The Employment and Social Policy Council adopted a European strategy for the fight against social exclusion in Luxembourg on 17 October.
The European Charter of Fundamental Rights, which will be officially announced at the Nice Summit, recognises the right to social security and to health protection as a common reference value.
In its fight to combat discrimination and social exclusion, and in terms of the responsibilities of each individual, the European Parliament will take pride in giving a strong impetus to the establishment of a system which will allow the essential principle of solidarity to be practically implemented.
To this end, I sought the opinion of the Economic and Social Committee, which greatly clarified a number of points in a communication which was adopted with a very large majority.
The opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and the proposals of the draftsman, Ioannis Marinos, gave rise to a large number of debates and favoured the adoption of compromise texts.
A broad consensus was finally reached within the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs, which I have the honour of chairing.
The proposed system contains a number of approaches, the first of which is the development of a common vision of universal services which allow access to essential healthcare within a reasonable timeframe.
The second is the establishment of a Community system to monitor health systems and their capacity to respond to specific needs: the collection of statistics and comparable data; the development of effective cooperation between the Member States and the pooling of good practice.
It should be possible for this monitoring system to be organised by extending the tasks of a Community agency that has already been formed.
The third approach is the presentation by the European Commission within a period of six months of a Green Paper examining a framework for supplementary health insurance schemes and proposing appropriate legislative initiatives. We have already called on the Commission to do this and, Commissioner, we are aware that it will involve a considerable amount of work.
This will preferably be in the form of proposals for recommendations to include the following points: recognition by Member States of a common concept of a universal service to govern the basic service which will enable every European citizen to have access to the necessary care; establishing, in agreement with the private insuring bodies, guaranteed respect for the principle of non-discrimination; organising a system of pooling costs in order to cover the costs of persons and groups with serious existing diseases, and encouraging private insurers to develop preventative measures.
There should also be a proposal for a directive to include the following points: a prohibition on the use of personal medical data, such as genetic typing, a key point; ensuring that persons joining a scheme are not in principle required to undergo a medical examination; the introduction of an obligation to provide lifelong insurance by the insurer; undertaking to reimburse persons working and moving within the European Union in a more coordinated way and, finally, introducing a mediation procedure.
It would be necessary to consider encouraging and supporting the codes of conduct for insurers concluded on a national or transnational basis, and an annual forum to study these issues.
Mr President, I should like to thank the Committee Chairman, Mr Rocard, for his words of praise in connection with my opinion.
Supplementary health schemes have also developed, over and above the reasons quoted by Mr Rocard, because there is a need for improved care as the result of advances in medical treatments, which are too expensive for national health services to pay for.
However, they are also needed in order to compensate for the increasing shortcomings of national health services as the result of public-sector management, high costs and cutbacks in expenditure by governments, expenditure which has steadily decreased in all the Member States during the 1980s and at the beginning of the 1990s.
As in the past, these gaps are being filled and the increase in the demand for better health services is being increasingly covered by subsidiary and voluntary supplementary health schemes set up by public- or private-sector agencies on a profit-making or non-profit-making basis.
However, there are huge differences between one country and another and we have no detailed or comparable statistics to help us ascertain reliably what applies where, what works best, where the weaknesses lie etc., which is precisely why my opinion, which was drafted on the instructions of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, stresses the need, before any generally-applicable rules are introduced for supplementary health insurance, for the Commission to submit a Green Paper containing an analysis of all these separate issues, together with the relevant information.
We could then use the conclusions drawn from the paper to introduce some general rules for all the Member States, in order to improve the quality of supplementary health insurance and ensure that it adequately meets the needs of the weaker sections of the population.
However, these rules would need to take account of the subsidiarity principle, facilitate competition in the favourable sense of the word and not hamper the efficiency or speed of the private sector or its economic viability.
I should like to end by stressing that the distinguished rapporteur, Mr Rocard, took extensive account of the scientific observations and many of the suggestions in my opinion.
I should also like to thank my fellow members, Mr Pronk and Mr Karas, for their valuable contribution to the final report.
Mr President, I would like to offer warm thanks to Mr Rocard, and also to Mr Marinos, for their trail-blazing report, which is on the table today.
The issue of health insurance has occupied European minds for quite some time now, but the Kohll and Decker decrees, in which the European Court of Justice determined that healthcare received overseas must be remunerated by insurers, has in fact added an extra dimension to this discussion.
Mr Rocard' s report, which we have here before us, will help to stimulate debate about the further development of social security in Europe, within the context of growing competition and the rise of the single market in healthcare.
One of the main objectives of the current modernisation of social protection is guaranteed access to affordable health protection.
It is particularly important for the affordability of health care to be taken into consideration, because the discussion about social security is determined not so much by the quality as by the cost of health care.
With its Kohll and Decker decrees, the Court of Justice has sent a clear message to the EU Member States.
We are really coming round to the idea of cross-border care and so market forces are becoming increasingly applicable to health care.
Whether this will happen, to what extent and when, is still unclear.
Research and experiments have shown that it will not open the floodgates to medical tourism.
However, there can be no two ways about it; more and more people are going to seek health care overseas.
It is therefore imperative that the citizens are our main concern in this process.
This issue has one or two implications for us, but it will also have an impact on the national systems.
We are talking subsidiarity.
National systems of health care, and even the supervision of health insurance, are regulated at national level, but that does not mean that we are not all dealing with the same problems.
That is precisely why it is so important - and in fact this is far and away the most significant achievement of this report - for the Commission to produce a Green Paper on supplementary health insurance in the short term.
In point of fact, we must ask the Commission whether it is in a position to do this, and if so, how long will it take?
Because it is very important.
The statistics available to us in this sphere are not comparable, despite our best efforts to this end, and so it is crucial that we have this Green Paper.
Apart from that, there is a great deal people want done in the health care sector.
A significant number of these aspirations are at national level, but that does not mean that we should not compare notes.
Hitherto, this has been somewhat taboo up to a certain point.
The Kohll and Decker decree has made a breakthrough.
I also think the Rocard report has made a breakthrough on that score, but it is very important for the Commission to take up the initiative now, and come to the table with an actual Green Paper.
Once that is in place we will look at how we should take it forward.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, it is a pleasure to hear Members from all groups who accept their responsibility regarding social policy and who are prepared to work towards a consensus.
I would like to thank you Michel, as rapporteur, for your initiative in bringing the issue of supplementary health insurance to attention now, at the appropriate time.
I have some general comments on this subject.
We had never had it as good as now.
This is reflected in the fact that our life expectancy is increasing by three years every ten years, and that is not because we are leading a healthier lifestyle.
We are living to an older age because the body of medical knowledge is doubling every five years.
However, medical treatment is costing more and more money!
However, equal access to health care must be available to everyone, without exception.
This is important if we want a social Europe that sets us apart from others.
For example, although we often take the United States as a model for the free market economy, it would be a fatal mistake to follow their lead in health policy.
For instance, we see that in the US system, health costs as measured against gross domestic product are nearly twice as high as the EU average, and that in the United States there are still some 40 million people who have inadequate health insurance.
That is scarcely what you would call a responsible social policy.
So, as far as the European Union is concerned, it is more a question of seeking to develop a combination of health insurance and supplementary health insurance that does not sacrifice quality and is not socially exclusive.
The debate on health insurance in the EU must not end up going down a blind alley.
Unless there are pan-European requirements for supplementary insurance, we will have to be extremely cautious about the existing systems.
The risk that the less healthy and the elderly may not necessarily be able to secure full private insurance cover because they represent too high a risk is quite unacceptable in terms of social development.
Flawed thinking of this kind has no place in the European Union.
Therefore, during the first phase, we need to prepare a Green Paper on the situation of supplementary health insurance in the EU as soon as possible.
Following on from that, we will have to define minimum standards for supplementary insurance in Europe if we wish to achieve and further develop a reasonably equitable and socially balanced health-care system in the EU worthy of the name of a social Union.
After all, that is what we want, is it not?
Mr President, I too should like to thank Mr Rocard for his own-initiative report, even if I did not agree with his original view which was, of course, to establish supplementary health insurance schemes in all EU countries, founded on the principle of solidarity and governed by a common set of regulations.
I can, however, support the Commission' s publishing a Green Paper explaining the ins and outs of such sickness insurance, focusing in particular upon sickness insurance in relation to cross-border activities and, in the process, looking into whether there is a need for further initiatives.
Sickness insurance is, of course, a national responsibility and systems differ from one another. It is true, however, that the growing number of elderly people and the growing demands upon the health sector mean that the systems are coming under financial pressure.
It is a problem calling for many different solutions, including better organised and more efficient health care, so that a better quality of service can be obtained for the same money.
Moreover, new medical methods can also, in fact, lead to both better and cheaper forms of treatment.
I am generally in favour of a system in which the money follows the patient as far as possible, so that it is the patient and not the system that is central.
In this perspective, there is certainly justification for insurance-style sickness schemes and supplementary insurance schemes.
However, the individual country must decide for itself what arrangements it prefers.
It would be wrong if the EU were to devise rules concerning, for example, data relating to health, or requiring everyone to be insured and, in that way, destroy the multiplicity of supplementary health insurance schemes which exist today in many countries and operate on actuarial principles.
It is right that, in connection with serious illnesses such as cancer and aids, there must be a compulsory system, founded on the principle of solidarity, which ensures good treatment for everybody.
Supplementary health insurance must be just that: supplementary, for example, for those who are willing to pay for an extra service, or designed to cover the costs of more ordinary and frequently occurring illnesses for which actuarial calculations can reasonably be made.
Mr President, the debate which followed the presentation of this own-initiative report at last highlighted two concepts, one of which, unfortunately only too prevalent, involves favouring the commercialisation of all aspects of life and aiming to reduce supplementary health insurance to a mere project by placing it in the hands of economic operators and subjecting it to the rules of the internal market.
According to this concept, the purpose of the market in profit-making supplementary health insurance schemes is to increasingly and crucially take on the role of supplementing the basic state systems.
This view turns up its nose at the non-profit-making mutual insurance companies, which are vital players in supplementary health insurance in several Member States.
The other viewpoint illustrated by the rapporteur' s initial statement and shared by a number of members is to promote regulations and codes of conduct which are needed in order to establish among insurers ways of organising costs on a mutual basis providing everybody with guaranteed access to high-quality care and to counter the risk of discriminatory practices developing together with risk and client selection.
The report by Michel Rocard, which is being presented today as amended in committee, demonstrates the difficulty of overcoming these contradictions.
The amendments we are proposing on behalf of the Group of the Greens recommend that consideration should be given to the following points.
Firstly, we have not, unlike some, resigned ourselves to the reduction in the relative share of public expenditure on health.
Demographic trends, the effects of an ageing population and increased demand for medical treatment necessitate a public debate.
It should be the citizens of the European Union who decide the outcome of this social debate and the volume of funds that must be allocated in order to guarantee the fundamental right to social protection.
The increasing transfer of responsibilities from the basic systems to the supplementary health insurance systems is doubly disadvantageous in that it reduces the obligations of these systems, while at the same time weakening non-profit-making mutual insurance companies which reject risk selection.
We propose that the report should include recognition of a right to health care for all, rather than simply the recognition of a basic service which is accessible to all.
We also propose removing all risk of discrimination or risk selection which would, we believe, result from the legislation calling for medical examinations to be carried out before a supplementary health insurance contract is concluded as provided for in Paragraph 11b.
Mr President, a while ago, I received a serious meniscus injury.
I turned to the health service and was told that I had to wait three weeks for an examination and then at least a further month for a crucial operation.
I said, 'I can hardly walk!
I need help straight away.
Can I not be admitted as an emergency patient?'
I received the answer, 'Everyone in the queue is an emergency case'.
It then appeared that there was in fact a way of getting in.
I was suddenly informed that, if I had private health insurance or if I could pay the whole cost myself, then I could be examined immediately and be treated by the same doctor I should otherwise be forced to wait two months to be treated by.
I am rather ashamed to admit it, but I chose that solution.
I was operated on immediately, and that is why I am able to be here today.
Otherwise, I should have been at home with my leg in plaster.
It nonetheless leaves a bad taste in the mouth, because each time a private patient jumps the queue, as I did, other people have to wait longer with their problems.
It is, of course, the same doctor, the same nurses, the same hospitals and the same resources in the health care sector which are to be used, irrespective of whether it is ordinary or private patients who are being treated.
This means that the bigger the health insurance sector becomes, the fewer resources there are left for general health care.
I think it is completely wrong that it should be money which decides who goes to the front of the queue.
If we acquire an extended system of supplementary insurance for those who can pay, or who have employers who can pay, then we get what the report talks about, namely a distinction between basic care for 'ordinary people' and high-quality care for those who can pay.
My group believes that this class-determined type of organisation must be objected to.
We want to see common arrangements which are based on the principle of solidarity and are the same for everyone.
It is, of course, good that, as Mr Rocard proposes, the attempt should be made to supervise existing schemes, but what is most important of all is that private systems should not be allowed to expand at the expense of public systems.
Mr President, the observations made by Michel Rocard on the right to health and social protection are alarming but, unfortunately, pertinent.
During the 1990s, a sharp fall in contributions has penalised health funds.
Almost everywhere in Europe this has resulted in a ticket system which penalises patients by making them contribute to the cost of medical treatment and in the marked decline of preventative medicine.
We must therefore ensure better reimbursement of costs.
I wish to highlight the uniqueness of the French insurance environment, in which the mutualist sector ensures good unified management of care.
If more and more Europeans turn to supplementary health insurance in order to reimburse health care costs, the mutualist sector will remain the best guarantee for equal access to care.
In particular I have in mind the areas in which costs are reimbursed at the lowest levels: dental and eye treatment and so on.
In order to ensure the survival of this sector, in my view it is vital that we give mutual societies a legal base in the field of supplementary cover.
I also think it crucial that the Commission should not attack this sector on the grounds of distortion of competition.
Who will be able to guarantee that discrimination on the grounds of health, handicap or impediment is prohibited and not practised, if supplementary health insurance is regulated simply by the logic of competition?
With human genetic mapping, it is necessary to prohibit genetic tests and the use of their results before the conclusion or during the term of a supplementary health protection contract.
The same applies to the health of all the citizens of our Member States and the cohesion of our territories.
Regional inequalities in terms of development are glaring enough.
Let us not add to this a two-speed Europe of health.
We must of course legislate, but we must do this by respecting the individual characteristics and insurance traditions of each Member State.
Mr President, Commissioner, greater generosity of cover for individuals and rising costs in the Member States' health sector are creating two requirements. First, the need for individuals to pay more from their own pockets towards statutory schemes or through private supplementary health insurance, and secondly greater coordination of such private health insurance in the European Union.
My sincere congratulations go to the rapporteur, Michel Rocard.
His diagnosis is first-rate, but there are a couple of question marks hanging over the treatment he prescribes.
I need to distinguish here between his practical requests and the key points of the approach he suggests to solve the problems here. These are based on important principles, namely solidarity, subsidiarity and minimum standards, and we fully accept those.
As Mr Pronk indicated, we oppose the idea of imposing a directive immediately.
The Committee on Employment and Social Affairs' new proposal is correct, suggesting as it does that there should first be a review of the situation in the form of a Green Paper and that only then should decisions be made about whether a directive or recommendation is needed.
As regards the heterogeneous nature of the systems already in existence, there are Member States in which individuals have to find a substantial proportion themselves, for example 40% of the cost of outpatient treatment.
In these cases supplementary schemes are more significant than in Germany, for example, where 90% of the population are covered by statutory health insurance which up to now has been obliged to guarantee necessary medical treatment for all.
We in Europe should be pointing the way forward without delay, with a socially acceptable level of self-provision combined with the maintenance of existing standards, if necessary by means of permanent supplementary health insurance.
But people will need time to build up a suitable level of provision.
That is the alternative to the manipulation and trickery of insurance systems that comes with statutory schemes.
Mr President, I would like to echo the sentiments of those who have congratulated Michel Rocard on this excellent initiative, which is in the best tradition of Parliament' s Committee on Employment and Social Affairs.
The report is based on the intention expressed by the Council in 1992 to achieve convergence of objectives and policies in the sphere of social security, and it links these with the existing objectives announced in Lisbon with regard to social cohesion and economic progress.
I think the connection between these two elements is a very sound one.
I expressly included a third element in my contribution in the committee, which I believe makes another strong case for European action in the field of health insurance; in particular, the removal of obstacles to freedom of movement, and not just the free movement of services that Bartho Pronk talked about, but also the free movement of persons within the EU.
In particular, these sentiments are to be found in recital J and Paragraphs 11 e) and f) and 14 of this report.
Many sometimes distressing problems and examples from real life prompted me to table these amendments.
I am delighted that the rapporteur and the committee have adopted them.
It is not by chance that I am particularly used to facing such problems by virtue of my Dutch background.
We have a special combination of private, public, individual and collective types of health insurance system, which have undergone quite some upheaval in recent times.
Leaving aside for the moment the question as to whether these changes were for the better, one thing is for sure: far too little attention was given to the effects of these changes on cross-border workers, retired Dutch nationals living abroad, and for example, Germans and Belgians working in the Netherlands.
In terms of European coordination, the current combination of fiscally financed national insurance for nationals, compulsory insurance for employees up to a certain income level and, in addition, private insurance with collective or individual regimes, is a downright disaster.
The national insurance system is not subject to the coordination rules because it is not employees' insurance and only applies to nationals.
The private system has to do with the directives for the insurance sector in the sphere of competition.
There is at present an on-going discussion in the Netherlands about structural changes to the system.
An opinion is being prepared on this in the Social and Economic Council.
It looks as if employers and employees are at last to reach agreement on basic health insurance in which market forces and competition between insurers will be combined with agreements on a compulsory basic package and, in addition, a broad package with optional elements which must, at the very least, be subject to an acceptance obligation and an average premium.
This is with a view to avoiding risk selection and exclusion, and to secure optimum accessibility for everyone.
Fortunately, the parties in the SER have realised that creating such a hybrid mixture of private and public elements might run up against conflicting legislation from Brussels.
People have been doing some fact-finding on this ahead of time, and have reached the sensible conclusion that, whatever happens, the entire system must now fall within the scope of the social insurance system.
Coordination at European level would certainly make this a whole lot simpler for those who live and work over the border.
I believe this fits in with the convergence strategy that the rapporteur has in mind.
I also feel that the increase in labour mobility in Europe is necessary and lends weight to our argument in favour of producing the aforementioned Green Paper and measures on the cost of public health.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Mr Rocard is calling on the Commission to define a framework for basic statutory health insurance systems in a Green Paper.
The logic of this is that all health care not included in this basic insurance has to be covered by private supplementary health insurance.
That means that the present statutory health insurance system, which has, up to now, been based on the principle of social solidarity, will be reduced to an "à la carte" health system.
The public would then have to invest additional and ever greater amounts in private supplementary health insurance schemes in order to pay for costly treatment that has, thus far, been covered by statutory health insurance systems.
For example, someone who is chronically ill but who has only a small income will, in future, accordingly find it very difficult to afford the treatment they need.
This simply amounts to dismantling public services and it implies turning our backs on the principle of equal health care for all based on need.
We reject this socially unacceptable reform.
Article 35 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights calls for the establishment of a universal right of access to preventative health care and for a high level of health protection to be defined and put into practice.
On this basis, the Commission should take the initiative and create solid cornerstones by way of guidelines for the Member States' health systems.
This would enable the EU to lead the way by creating a social Europe and a high standard of health care for all, regardless of income.
Rules concerning the coordination of private supplementary health insurance systems in the EU make sense as long as they involve guarantees of freedom of movement for individuals and employees.
We also support the call for a ban on genetic testing or medical examinations leading to selection on the basis of risk.
Supplementary health insurance schemes must provide protection against the risk of bankruptcy, insolvency and fraud, but should not serve as an excuse for limiting the range of services provided by statutory health insurance.
Mr President, I should also like to congratulate the rapporteur on his own-initiative report, particularly because it is precisely that: an own-initiative report.
He affirms, especially in Paragraph 17, that publicly funded health care systems should remain within the exclusive competence of the Member States and I very much agree with this.
He highlights the need to address the issue of health problems of tourists visiting other Member States, and this is certainly a very live issue, as I know from the many letters on this subject I receive from constituents.
But above all he draws attention, for example in Paragraph 3, to the significant problems regarding the long-term sustainability of public health care systems throughout the EU because of the increasing cost of advances in treatment possibilities, as well as the growing demand from an increasingly elderly population.
This is a major concern.
We certainly need fresh thinking on this subject and that has to include new ways of private and public health care working together.
His report is a useful contribution to that debate, though I hope he agrees in turn that the contributions made in committee, including those made on this side of the House, may perhaps have made it even more useful.
It is certainly now much less prescriptive, which is good.
Health care is financed in different ways in different Member States and the roles of private health insurers are correspondingly different.
Even the definitions of "supplementary" and "complementary" have slightly different meanings in different languages.
So an absolute "one size fits all" solution for insurance is unlikely to be the answer.
On the basis that Amendments Nos 2 and 3 are passed, which accept the suggestion of a Green Paper but do not dictate precisely what has to be in it, I shall certainly be calling upon my UK colleagues to vote in favour, though I shall be proposing abstention on Amendment No 16
Mr President, I am sure that the rapporteur, Mr Rocard, means well, but to me he resembles a man tiptoeing along a tightrope.
On the one hand, when he says "solidarity", he means it as a Socialist, but he does not want to take responsibility for protecting the social state and the health and welfare systems which are currently being attacked both by objective events and specific policies.
On the other hand, he does not want to go too far the other way; he wants to apply a Realpolitik, but without quite signing up to the American model.
I think that we need to be extremely careful.
We really are on a tightrope and I think that decisions on supplementary insurance which will apply to all the Member States need to be taken cautiously and with a great deal of circumspection.
If supplementary insurance becomes the general rule, we shall simply end up increasing workers' contributions; but if we have selective supplementary insurance, we shall also have discrimination and that is something we wish to avoid.
In this sense, I think that, basically, we should await the Commission study on current systems as well as a Commission study on the American system and the schemes in operation in other countries because then we shall have a clearer picture of all this.
Mr President, those of us who have devoted ourselves all our lives to studying social issues will remember that the old manuals used to include a definition of social protection as a set of state protection measures to cover economically assessable risks affecting individuals or families which individuals - family units - could not cover themselves.
Health is, of course, one of the assets that we as individuals most value, though very often when we have lost or risk losing it.
It is, moreover, a fact that social systems - protection systems - have been suffering from the influences and consequences of economic, demographic and public health situations, etc.
And it is also a fact that economic recession, unemployment, social exclusion, the appearance of new diseases, the ageing of the population, as well as advances in research, improved therapies, the development of new techniques of diagnosis and treatment have all had a profound effect on the levels of mandatory social and health cover.
It is a proven and verifiable fact that Europeans are being protected against the risks of illness, maternity or old age (and there are more risks associated with old age these days because of the ageing of the population) not just by the essential and mandatory social and state schemes of social security or social protection.
Articles 34 and 35 of our fledgling European Union Charter of Fundamental Rights recognise and respect the entitlement to social security benefits and social services and, at the same time, proclaim the entitlement of everyone residing and moving legally within the Union to social security benefits and social advantages in accordance with Community law and national laws and practices.
Complementary private health insurance, whether voluntary or not, coexists with the mandatory public system and can be a way to achieve quality health care within a given time.
I therefore believe we should lend our support to what Mr Rocard has put in his report - and we congratulate him on it - asking the Commission to provide a service, a Green Paper which will enable us to see the current insurance situation in the Member States and also to define the future.
Mr President, the report and the accompanying explanations are based on a damning conclusion.
For twenty years, statutory health cover for the people of Europe has been in constant decline while the share of health costs they have had to pay has continually increased.
Increasing numbers of people are witnessing a drastic reduction in their standard of living through badly paid jobs, unemployment, job insecurity and exclusion. They no longer have the means to take care of themselves properly, or indeed to gain access to the most basic forms of healthcare.
Faced with this intolerable situation, the report envisages nothing but recourse to private or mutualist supplementary health insurance schemes, which it claims to be the solution to the problem.
But exactly whom does this solution benefit?
Certainly not those who will have to pay even more for their care, even though society denies them the means to pay.
This is, first and foremost, a solution that benefits the private insurers to whom the Member States have handed the healthcare market on a plate.
This report and its accompanying amendments would like to impose rules to prevent forms of selection, based on criteria of health or handicap, on sharks such as the insurance company, Axa, which has multiplied the contributions paid by parents of mentally handicapped children by a factor of ten.
Imposing such rules is the very minimum necessary and we will vote in favour, but we have no intention of accepting the fact that this proposal releases Member States from their duty to carry out a literally crucial task in terms of a public health service.
Whilst medicine has made tremendous progress, empty phrases about providing access to quality health care for all are nothing but hot air. Lack of investment by Member States and growing health privatisation can only result in selection by money, growing inequality with implications ...
(The President cut the speaker off)
I would like to thank Mr Rocard for his initiative.
Mr President, as representative of the Pensioners' Party - which is as good as blamed for the longer life expectancy of citizens and pensioners and therefore for this health service crisis - how could I fail to say a few words on this occasion.
I have to say, even, that I am rather taken over by the subject for, to my eyes, Mr President, you resemble a chief physician, with a white coat, stethoscope and hammer to test the patient's reflexes.
We are discussing public and private health care.
But if public health care is working so well, why is it that in Italy, for example - and "the voice of the people is the voice of God" - the people were saying that health insurance schemes take away your health and leave you dissatisfied?
Why did the great Italian actor, Alberto Sordi, have such success with a film about the Italian health service, entitled "The Family Doctor"?
Why, in response to a question I put to him, did the great doctor, Christian Barnard, whom I had the good fortune to meet last week at a convention organised by Mr Nisticò, reply that when he performed the first heart transplant in South Africa it was in a private clinic?
Why is it, as happened to me when I went to visit my dear mother - who is still alive, thank God - in a major public hospital in Rome, that we see people who are dying accommodated in the same wards as other patients who are happily eating their lunch or supper?
Well then, this means that we need to reflect at great length upon the reasons why public health care is in such a state.
In my opinion, it is because public health care is paid for before the patient is treated whereas private health care is paid for after and if the patient is treated.
And so I and my pensioner friends call upon Commissioner Diamantopoulou to put on a doctor's white coat, to treat the European Union's poorly medical service and to make us better.
Mr President, Commissioner, Mr Rocard, first I would like to thank Messrs Marinos, Pronk and Menrad, and last but not least, Mr Ettl, very sincerely for their support in getting my amendments accepted and in changing the objectives of this report.
Financing statutory health care and pension schemes is at the heart of the social and budgetary debate in Europe.
Both have similar causes, with demographic change in the one case and specialist and technical progress in medicine in the other.
Both are based on a three-pillar model with state, company and private provision.
We all know that these systems have been built up and interlinked in different ways and that they provide different cover from one Member State to another.
Both sectors also have national requirements that act as an obstacle to mobility and flexibility for employees in Europe and increase employers' costs.
So I am glad that the rapporteur has been willing to move from his categorical demand for a directive to an in-depth analysis in the form of a Green Paper.
And I am pleased that we have abandoned the idea of applying the French model to Europe in its entirety, which would not be possible here.
We need to define what we mean by the concept of supplementary insurance.
For me, supplementary insurance means a voluntary system which is either a private or company system, supplementing basic state provision ...
(The President cut the speaker off)
Mr President, first of all, congratulations to Mr Rocard on his report.
It is every bit as important as the procedure concerning supplementary pension schemes that has got underway.
In order to avoid any misunderstandings, I would once again like to stress that the present report concerns supplementary health insurance and not health care as such, although obviously the two cannot be separated.
Supplementary health insurance presupposes a statutory system of entitlements and provisions.
This system, which is secured by the government, is required to provide sound, adequate, accessible, and hence affordable, health care.
The better the statutory system, the less need there will be for supplementary health insurance, and the less significant it will be.
However, technological progress and the demographic situation with regard to dejuvenation and the ageing of the population, mean that supplementary health insurance is not surplus to requirements and is even indispensable in some cases.
This is an upwards trend owing to the reorganisation of the social security systems in certain Member States.
At the same time, this presents an outstanding opportunity to make people aware that they must take responsibility for themselves in these matters.
Because in the same way that we ought not to transfer the whole burden to individual citizens, nor should we expect the state to shoulder the entire load.
Supplementing collective solidarity mechanisms with private or group insurance is completely in keeping with the principle of subsidiarity.
The EU has already produced a piece of legislation on supplementary pensions in the form of a Green Paper, which has resulted in a draft directive.
So information has been gathered, research has been carried out, the systems in the various Member states have been investigated, etc., which is certainly the right way to go about it.
It stands to reason that the Member States are ultimately the ones responsible for their system of social security.
But, if insurance, and therefore supplementary health insurance, are offered within a common market, then this presupposes common rules on competition, insolvency, discrimination, transparency and suchlike.
Mr President, the original draft of Mr Rocard's report contained proposals which could have destroyed the health insurance market in Europe.
It is fundamental to the insurance business that premiums are related to predictable risks.
This applies in all kinds of insurance including life, car and home protection insurance.
If the original proposals had been carried to outlaw discrimination on the grounds of medical history, then premiums would have been attractive to the chronically sick and unattractive to the fit and healthy.
As a result it would have been predominantly the chronically sick who would buy insurance. This in turn would have created a vicious circle of higher and higher premiums and fewer and sicker policyholders.
It could have destroyed the industry and put new burdens on state systems.
It is a classic example of socialist interventionism.
By trying to eliminate discrimination on the grounds of health status, Mr Rocard would have killed the goose that laid the golden egg.
I am reminded of the story of the representative of the government who went to a businessman and said "how can the government help you?" and the answer was "you can help us best by leaving us alone."
When will we learn that lesson?
Of course, we should promote a vigorous and vibrant market for health insurance in Europe. We must also support state provision, at least for those with difficult health problems who would be uninsurable in the private sector.
The best way to achieve these objectives is for the state to leave the private sector to get on with its job.
The new proposal before us is for a Green Paper.
This is better than the original proposal but even this is a step too far.
Today's Green Paper becomes tomorrow's intrusive and damaging legislation.
The best way we can help this industry, and the patients it serves, is to leave it alone.
Mr President, I would like to thank and congratulate Mr Rocard for his report and to congratulate Mr Marinos for his committee's opinion.
The Commission welcomes this initiative and it comes at crucial time because we have just launched a political debate at the European level on the reform of social protection.
It is the first time that we have decided that there is a need for cooperation on reform of social protection systems at the European level.
This report underlines the economic and social challenges posed by the measures relating to supplementary health insurance and, of course, supplementary health insurance is of vital importance nowadays because the basic insurance system is ripe for reform and because healthcare needs are becoming greater and greater.
The report says there is a need for the Commission to act and, of course, we agree.
First, we must take into account the great diversity which exists at the European level.
There are huge differences from Member State to Member State as far as the definition is concerned, as far as the functioning of the systems are concerned, the combination between the public and the private sector.
As an example, as far as the differences in the role played by voluntary and supplementary health insurance is concerned, the coverage of the population by voluntary or supplementary health insurance mechanisms ranges from under 0.5% in Sweden to more than 85% in France.
However, these figures are somewhat misleading since both the concept and the coverage of the system differ significantly from country to country.
The Commission will act immediately in the framework of its competences and I will try to reply to the conclusions of your report.
First, on the question of the Green Paper, the complexity of the issues is such that a Green Paper may seem premature.
However, it is essential to draw up an in-depth report on the situation and we can do this as soon as possible.
Of course, we will take into account the wide variety of national systems and the complex nature of healthcare systems across Europe.
The Commission will immediately launch a study of supplementary health insurance.
Because of the complexity of the issue, we believe we can publicise the results by the end of 2001.
This study can form the basis for a communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament proposing initiatives or measures.
In keeping with Parliament's requests, we will try to present a framework, an objective and reasoned analysis, which will take into account all this variety and diversity and we will focus on the different aspects of the issues.
You have referred to the wide range of aspects.
We can go from general questions such as access to healthcare for all, to the more specific questions on the rights of individuals who want to settle or work in other Member States.
As far as the other two proposals are concerned - the directive, the legal action, and this European forum - this is something we can think about.
It could form the second step after this study in one year's time when we not only have the comparison between Member States but we could also work with comparable indicators which are important for any proposals for European cooperation.
The debate is closed.
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 12 noon.
Combating social exclusion
The next item is the report (A5-0307/2000) by Mrs Figueiredo, on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs, on the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing a programme of Community action to encourage cooperation between Member States to combat social exclusion (COM(2000) 368 - C5-0317/2000 - 2000/0157(COD)).
, rapporteur.
(PT) Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, as we all know, inequalities in the European Union have been exacerbated over the last decade and the number of people living on low incomes is now some 65 million, that is, around 18% of the population.
This represents a real body blow to fundamental human rights, since it denies millions of people access to basic social rights, such as housing, health care, education, training and study, good-quality employment and fair wages.
Whilst there are considerable differences between the various Member States, the most serious situation is definitely that of Portugal, with around 24% of the population living below the poverty line due primarily to low salaries, insecure and badly paid jobs and pensions and benefits so low that they do not enable workers and their families or the elderly to live with a minimum of dignity.
This unacceptable situation of poverty and social exclusion, which the Lisbon European Council of 23 and 24 March acknowledged is in need of urgent measures, requires a profound change in Community and national macroeconomic policies and putting an end to the monetarist policies of the Stability Pact in order not only to combat the current situation of poverty, but also to prevent the situation deteriorating in the future, including in the field of new technologies.
Particular attention needs to be paid to the situation of women, children and young people, thereby guaranteeing everyone access to incomes and conditions that allow them to live and work in dignity.
Despite all the commitments that the Council gave recently at the Lisbon Summit, however, and despite the emphasis it placed on the existing correlation between economic and social progress, the proposals that have been presented are little more than face-saving measures with regard to the countless promises to fight for the eradication of poverty.
In fact, the proposal for a Community programme presented by the Commission to foster cooperation between the Member States in the field of combating social exclusion is little more than a study programme.
It is therefore crucial for various aspects of the programme to be improved, specifically with regard to the innovations being proposed for the implementation of an open method of coordination.
A European reflection group needs to be created, composed of Community partners, representatives of NGOs with experience in this field and representatives of the European Parliament, the Council and the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions. A network could also be established, linking the various monitoring centres or similar recognised bodies that already exist in the Member States.
Another option is to pay special attention to the problems of poverty and social exclusion at local, regional and national level, involving in the programme the social groups that are most badly affected or which are in the most danger of becoming so.
Equally important are the proposals to increase financing from EUR 70 million to EUR 100 million, proposals which focus on the need for the Commission to guarantee the coherence of its policies, specifically in the economic, monetary and taxation areas, as well as in competition, consumer protection, fisheries and agriculture, with the aim of eliminating the poverty and social exclusion encountered at national level.
The Commission will, as a result, be obliged to undertake an assessment of its policies in terms of their potential effects on poverty and social exclusion.
I also hope that the amendments seeking to ensure that qualifications and integration into professional life are given particular attention will be adopted, which is why it is important to take account of the ever-increasing phenomenon of social exclusion and poverty despite paid employment.
It is crucial to guarantee good-quality employment with reasonable rights and wages and to establish conditions for access to public services that are also of high quality.
It is crucial for the Council to keep the promises it has given, not only with regard to the programme, but also with regard to setting appropriate objectives and goals, to be agreed on by the end of this year, so that it meets the expectations it created with the Lisbon Summit conclusions on its commitment to combat poverty, unemployment and social exclusion.
Lastly, I wish to express my gratitude for the superb cooperation of my fellow members of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs, of the rapporteurs from other committees, of the Economic and Social Committee, of the Committee of the Regions, of the NGOs involved in social work and of the specialists within the Commission, the French Presidency and Parliament who have worked with me.
In this work, and bearing in mind that this is a subject for codecision, we have been able to reach a consensus that seeks to simplify the final report and to enable it to be rapidly adopted by the Council.
This means that the amendments we have tabled to be voted on tomorrow are the result of the consensus achieved in committee, including the new amendments replacing and rejecting various original amendments which were somewhat repetitive.
I thank you for your understanding during this procedure, which means that we are able to contribute to the European Union once again having a programme in this field, despite its limitations and shortcomings.
This will be one more instrument enabling us to remain vigilant in defending greater social justice.
Mr President, first of all I would like to thank Mrs Figueiredo for her report.
Secondly, I would like to say how delighted I am that a compromise has indeed been reached on this important report, which means that the first reading can be brought to a successful conclusion.
I am very pleased to be able to tell you that all the amendments tabled by the Committee on Budgets have been adopted.
In fact there are three points I would like to make.
Firstly, the Committee on Budgets took the view that, in comparison with other programmes, Parliament did not have enough input to the programme and the Council had too much, in other words, it was slanted too much in the favour of the Council for our liking.
The second point, and this in fact is the most important point, is that of comitology.
This is heavily biased towards the Member States on some points.
Setting up a committee alone will lead to a six month delay in the establishment of the programme.
It will take six months to set up the committee and then call a meeting, and the Member States will not even need to use their usual blocking tactics, because all that will take at least a year.
Comitology really is a huge liability, as it is to this programme.
I would like to ask the Commission, following the example of what Mr Patten did, to reconsider whether it would not be possible to do something similar with regard to the Member States.
Finally, the question of technical support.
The Committee on Budgets insists that technical support be included in the programme.
The Committee on Employment and Social Affairs allocated EUR 100 million in the end.
A suitable amount of this must be set aside for technical support so as to be sure that the programme is properly supported.
Any complaints about this from the Commission are therefore unfounded as far as Parliament is concerned, if this technical support is to be included in the programme itself.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs would like to congratulate the rapporteur on her report.
She has already described the scandalous situation in which 18% of Europe's population lives below the relative poverty line.
This is not just a subject for discussion in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs, it is also of concern to us in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, because these 65 million people are not only excluded from access to financial and other resources, because they are not only excluded from social and cultural rights, but because they are also prevented from using their talents to help shape our society and because they are prevented from developing their own talents, gaining additional qualifications and skills and working in jobs they are suited for.
For that reason we in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs were almost unanimous in our opinion about adopting a guiding principle according to which everyone should be in a position to make an essential contribution to supporting themselves through their own work.
They should be enabled to gain and update qualifications and skills.
We know very well that the problem we are facing here will not be solved by a one-off initiative or by a single catching-up process.
No, what we are dealing with here is a permanent situation in which each new technological wave brings with it new winners and losers.
That is why we need to offer our societies mechanisms that allow those affected to find their places in society.
We consider that there are three issues here.
Social integration must be seen as a cross-cutting issue, and the results of our efforts should therefore also be included in the spring report.
We see this proposal as a milestone in the understanding and analysis of, and fight against, this phenomenon, which is spreading and growing, which has struck every society in Europe, which is manifesting itself in new forms in response to economic and technological changes and in the face of which many governments are at a loss and are therefore dragging their feet in coming to terms with and dealing with the social problems resulting from these widespread changes.
We support the various elements of the programme, such as a multidimensional approach to this phenomenon, measures on health, education, housing, cohesion and complementarity with other related policies and the involvement of both non-governmental organisations and the very people who are subject to social exclusion.
We support increasing the budget to EUR 100 000 000 and we attach great importance to the need for the programme to be carried out at grass roots level.
This is a real opportunity for the citizens of Europe to feel that a social Europe is being created and is a reality, rather than just a wish or a slogan.
We therefore attach huge importance to collaboration with agencies at local, regional and cross-border level, which is why we tabled various amendments which, fortunately, were taken on board by all the groups.
The Equal Opportunities Committee stressed the need to take account in the programme of the fact that women are particularly vulnerable to social exclusion, particularly special categories of women such as immigrants, women with special needs, unemployed women, women with no modern vocational training and single mothers.
It is not just that these categories of women are cut off from the social fabric; they also find it difficult to acquire the prerequisites for reintegration.
We must monitor the application of the programme and its evaluation very closely, Commissioner, because we believe that it will help to achieve the objective we are all striving towards - the objective of a social Europe, a citizens' Europe.
The debate is now adjourned and will resume at 9 p.m.
Updating the stability programmes in Germany, Finland and the Netherlands
The next item is the Commission recommendations for a Council opinion on updating the stability programmes in Germany, Finland and the Netherlands.
Mr President, the Commission has today adopted three recommendations regarding three Council opinions on the updated stability programmes in Germany, the Netherlands and Finland; these are the first of the 2000-2001 round that have been updated and submitted.
As you will remember, the Stability and Growth Pact stipulates close, on-going supervision of the Member States' budgetary position during the third phase of Economic and Monetary Union.
The central elements in this supervision process are the stability programmes, which the Member States in the euro area have to present every year.
The countries outside the euro area present their convergence programmes, which to a great extent resemble the stability programmes, although the objectives to be achieved are different.
The stability programmes include the public finance strategies for the medium term.
How can they achieve a budgetary position in the medium term that is close to balance or in surplus?
The aim of this initiative, as you will remember, is to try to create sufficient margin so that in a crisis situation the government deficit will not exceed the reference budget deficit set at 3% of GDP, which could obviously be reached in a crisis phase.
This means we have to make the most of the growth phases of the cycle to bring the position back to balance or a surplus.
In their updating of the programmes each year, the Member States include an extra year in the programme, analyse the budget policy implemented during the past year, explain and describe the budget policy measures they have adopted, and also revise their budget forecasts and objectives.
This is the second time we have updated these programmes: we did it first in 1999, and now we are doing it again in 2000, thereby including one more year in the programme.
The document presented by a Member State is assessed by the Commission and, on the basis of this assessment, the Council may adopt the recommendation that the Commission presents.
In fact, in order to carry out this process, the Economic and Financial Committee first pays special attention to analysing the Commission recommendation and the programmes themselves.
In this context, to keep Parliament informed, the Commission considers it indispensable to report to it on the current stage of the proceedings.
Within the regular annual budget assessment procedure, the Commission can also choose to make recommendations of a different kind from those mentioned previously, which may, if appropriate, highlight the non-compliance of certain Member States with the deficit position.
As yet, it has not been necessary to use this instrument for coordinating economic policies; so far budgetary compliance has been working as laid down in the Stability and Growth Pact.
More and more Member States are reaching balanced or even clearly positive budgetary positions.
This has given us a different idea, making us wonder whether this Stability and Growth Pact has run its course, having achieved the quantitative objective of a particular final figure, or whether it is worth introducing other aspects relating to the quality of public finances in future programmes.
The Commission has opted for this second possibility; hence, in our annual assessment, we shall now also review other aspects previously not considered in the past: first, the orientation of budget policy in each of the Member States according to the point in the cycle at which it finds itself, that is, whether these kinds of budgetary measures are procyclic or anticyclic in nature and to what extent they help the market situation or create tensions within it.
Secondly, we shall also try to assess to what extent budget cuts and tax cuts are consistent, according to a number of principles which may enable us to adopt a common position on this point.
Thirdly - and this is a very important issue - we shall assess to what extent there is a restructuring of public expenditure to favour growth, production, and thus avoid inflationary tensions in the future.
Finally, we shall assess to what extent the national budgets presented each year are compatible with more ambitious medium-term strategies for public finances.
Thus, for instance, problems such as the ageing of the population are becoming increasingly more important.
In this respect may I just remind you that the last Ecofin Council asked the Commission to include in the assessment of the stability programmes from next year precisely this long-term aspect of public finances in connection with the ageing of the population.
Of the three programmes on which I am about to comment, one of them - the Netherlands programme - already includes an annex with a specific analysis of this particular problem.
I am now going to give a very brief mention of the three programmes that have recently been updated.
First of all, the three Member States whose stability programmes have been examined by the Commission today have made highly significant progress towards the restructuring of their public exchequers since 1997, the year in which they made their decisions to join the single currency; in fact, Finland already had a budget surplus in 1998 and the Netherlands in 1999.
In their new programmes, which cover up to 2004, Finland proposes to maintain a budget surplus of more than 4% of GDP.
The Netherlands will achieve small surpluses, which might be larger depending on economic growth and certain decisions on economic policy that are waiting to be adopted.
The case of Germany is different: it will gradually approach an overall balance.
However, in all three cases, there is sufficient margin to absorb the effect of fluctuations in the economic cycle; in other words, all three countries will be able to face a crisis situation, if one comes about, without exceeding the 3% budget deficit limit.
The three countries plan to introduce major tax cuts in 2001 and in subsequent years, which will relieve the tax pressure on labour and stimulate employment and investment; they are therefore positive and necessary provided that the public finances are kept stable.
Germany and the Netherlands both foresee a deterioration in their budget positions for the next year as a result of these tax cuts.
This issue is particularly important in the case of Germany since it means the gradual reduction of the public deficit will be interrupted.
One of our concerns with the German programme is clearly to insist that this dip in the trend must be a one-year exception arising from these tax cuts and must not affect future years.
In the case of the Netherlands, the Commission has other concerns, such as the suitability of the policy mix and the risks associated with the fiscal incentive effects of the tax cuts in a situation of strong economic growth, which might lead to the Netherlands economy overheating.
Our basic message is, therefore, that the margin for making tax cuts must be counterbalanced by strict public spending controls.
This year, Germany and the Netherlands have gained substantial revenue through the sale of third generation mobile telephony licences.
In the case of Germany, for instance, this represents 2.5% of GDP, and in the Netherlands 0.7% of GDP.
Both countries have very consistently made proper use of this revenue by using it to reduce the national debt.
Because of this factor and, more importantly, better budgetary positions and stronger economic growth, there will be a clear tendency for the proportions of national debt to fall over the coming years.
This year, for instance, Germany hopes to bring this proportion down to the reference level of 60% of GDP, and the Netherlands hopes to bring it even lower than that this year.
In the case of Finland, the national debt is already much lower than this target and is falling all the time.
These trends in the national debt mean lower interest payments, which will, in turn, help provide the necessary framework for tax cuts, and in some cases for specific increases in public spending.
One of the positive characteristics of the Netherlands programme, as I have said before, is the special attention it gives to the impact of the ageing of the population on the exchequer over the coming years.
This is a problem which will also have to be faced to a greater or lesser extent in other Member States, as was emphasised at the latest meetings of Eurogroup and the Ecofin Council.
Bearing in mind that costs will increase in the future, certain decisions will soon have to be made in order to contain them and ensure they can be managed in the long term.
Based on its own programme, the Netherlands Government is to make important decisions on the use of its budget margins, and it would be appropriate if it used these resources to bring the national debt down more quickly, which would give it greater margins to face these problems in the future.
The Finnish Government' s ambitious budgetary surplus targets are already motivated to a great extent by this ageing factor that I have mentioned.
We also hope that the next updating of the German stability programme will pay more attention to this aspect, taking into account the impact of the pension reform that is now under way.
Lastly, the Commission is delighted by the speed with which Germany, the Netherlands and Finland have presented their updated programmes.
In the last two countries, the programmes were adopted at the same time as the budget proposals for the coming year, which in the Commission' s opinion is a more suitable practice than used to happen, when we received these updates after each country' s budget had been presented.
This ensures that the annual budget decisions are made within a multiannual strategic framework and gives the Community institutions an up-to-date, overall view of each country' s economic situation based on the most recent data.
The Commission therefore recommends that the remaining Member States that are still preparing their updates should follow this example, not this year, when unfortunately it can no longer happen, but in future years.
These are the basic comments that I wished to make on the three programmes we present today.
I am at your disposal for any additional comment, to listen to your opinions and to answer any questions.
Mr President, Commissioner, we are grateful to you for your report on trends in net government borrowing in the European Union, Mr Solbes Mira.
I believe that, overall, the message here is a positive one.
When the Maastricht Treaty was drawn up, it was assumed that maximum permissible net government borrowing would be 3%.
Today, taking the average for the euro area, it has dropped back to around 1%, and we are moving towards balanced budgets, that is to say very much in the right direction.
Commissioner, does it not worry you that it appears that in Germany next year, instead of falling, net government borrowing will increase by a further 0.5%, despite the fact that income from UMTS licences this year has been like manna from heaven for Germany's finances?
We have noted that this development is taking place in the largest country in the euro area, whereas the Netherlands and Finland have already achieved what we are seeking, that is budget surpluses which enable excessive debt to be repaid.
So let me ask you once again: does this not worry you?
I would like to stress once again that we in the Group of the European People's Party regard the independence of the European Central Bank, combined with consistent application of stability and growth factors, as being a fundamental requirement for price stability in Europe.
Mr President, it is true, as I said before, that this is one of the points we highlighted in the case of Germany, in which there are two points of interest.
First of all, the proceeds of the UMTS licences, as I said before, have been allocated to reducing the debt, so that the national debt is now practically down to the 60% level.
For accounting reasons, the revenue from the third generation mobile licences also has to be included for reducing the deficit.
For this reason, the budget result for the year 2000 in the case of Germany will give a surplus of one and a half per cent of GDP.
If we deduct the revenue from mobile licences from this one and a half per cent, we are left with a 1% budget deficit, which is the figure we can use for the stability programme.
Therefore, to answer your question, we will have a situation of a 1.4% deficit in 1999, a 1% deficit in 2000, and - as you rightly say - in 2001 the deficit will rise again to 1.5% instead of falling.
Why does the Commission accept this increase in the deficit?
Basically, because of the positive impact that the tax measures may have in Germany.
Germany has a higher than average tax burden.
The set of tax measures adopted by Germany affects the supply side of the economy more than the demand side but will also have some effect on demand, and we believe it will allow the growth potential of the German economy to increase in the medium term.
We therefore consider these measures to be positive, even though they mean a step backwards compared with the previous situation.
Nevertheless - and we left this very explicitly set out in the programme - we are especially concerned about this backward step, and we are aware that such backward steps have to be made up later.
Hence we must insist on the German Government taking special care when drawing up the working programmes for 2002, on increasing revenue and on cutting costs in order to achieve a reduction in the budget deficit again.
According to the current programme, the budget deficit should drop to 1% in 2002 and 0.5% in 2003, and Germany should balance its budget in 2004.
A little late and not quite as we would have liked, but in any case with enough margin not to have difficulties in the event of an economic crisis.
Mr President, I too am heartened to see that public finances in the countries concerned are sound, but I have noticed that more and more people are becoming nervous about the situation regarding price stability in Europe.
They state that, in one of the largest countries - which is also one of the most important countries for the European economy, namely Germany - there is a risk of jumping into something resembling overheating.
I should like to hear your assessment of inflationary development in Germany and ask whether you think that inflation in the EU generally is cause for concern.
When I mentioned overheating, I was referring more to the economies of the Netherlands and Finland than to the German economy.
The overheating problem does not arise in Germany in the same way as it does in these other countries.
There is no doubt at all that inflation is a worry.
We must not forget that we have had a double setback in the last year, as a result of oil prices trebling in little more than a year.
If we add to that the fall in the exchange rate of the euro against the dollar, we have had an obvious setback in terms of inflation.
As you know, at the moment we have an inflation figure of 2.8%, clearly higher than our target as defined by the Central Bank.
Underlying inflation, however, is still only 1.4%, which means we can consider oil to be the basic and fundamental cause of this situation.
What are our inflation prospects?
I shall be able to comment on this in more detail after the 22nd, when we present our economic perspective for the coming year, but according to our initial estimates, in 2000 we shall end up with an average level of inflation a little above the inflation target laid down by the Central Bank, but clearly higher than what we had forecast in our April perspective - we had talked of 1.8% then.
In 2001 it will be higher than the forecast we had also made in the spring, which was also about 1.8 or 1.7%.
The average will, however, be much closer to 2%, which, as I have said, is the target of the Central Bank' s monetary policy.
All this will, of course, happen if we do not have any new surprises with oil prices or the dollar exchange rate.
Commissioner, you rightly - in my opinion - placed great emphasis in your speech on the problem represented by the ageing population, both for the three countries in question and all the other European countries as well, and you touched upon the need to tackle the issue of the ageing population and therefore the question of the pension deficit, which is an unknown quantity weighing heavily upon the public finances of the European countries, hindering recovery, and it will do so increasingly in the future.
In last July's publication, the European Central Bank indicated a way, in the social security plans reform - that is, moving from the current "Pay-as-you-go" system to a funded system for mandatory contributions as well - of freeing up resources and, in perspective, ensuring the sustainability of European social security plans.
I would like to know, Commissioner, whether the Commission can tell us anything about this.
Mr President, thank you, Mr Della Vedova.
The Commission brought up the issue at the time and the Lisbon European Council accepted the need to analyse in depth the problem of the ageing of the population in Europe.
In fact, with the Commission' s cooperation, the Economic Policy Committee has been working on this topic for the last few months.
At the last Ecofin council meeting, a report by the Economic Policy Committee was presented which, in general terms, highlighted the fact that there is a problem of ageing in general in Europe, but not exactly the same in all countries.
There are very important differences in countries such as Ireland, for instance, which has a very young population and which still has room for an increase in the activity rate compared with countries with higher activity rates and older populations.
The report emphasises the fact that the reforms carried out so far in the social security systems are helping to improve the situation.
It also emphasises that national debt reductions, insofar as they can reduce future deficits, may help to resolve the situation.
In the medium term, I can tell you that the situation over the next twenty years will vary from country to country, but it will mean an extra 2% to 7% increase in government deficit, depending on the characteristics of each country.
Nonetheless, these two elements will not be enough to deal with the problem.
As for the solution that can be adopted, it will, of course, be a national decision to be made in each of the Member States; the Commission will not make any proposals in this regard.
At the moment the impression I have is that the formulas being used in the various Member States are moving in three directions.
First they are moving towards a search for some system for financing the pay-as-you-go schemes, which may mean some element of pre-funding;
I mentioned the Dutch system before, which already has obvious pre-funding elements.
They are also moving towards making a public pay-as-you-go scheme compatible with private pre-funding schemes, and of course they are also compatible with support for the setting up of specific investment funds, which may obtain long-term tax advantages and may help to deal with the ageing problem.
But, in the end, it will be each Member State' s own decision that prevails, because, as I have said before, this matter is the responsibility of each one of them.
Thank you, Commissioner.
BSE and general ban on animal meal in feedingstuffs
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on BSE and the general ban on animal meal in feedingstuffs.
Madam President, I am glad of the opportunity to update you on the latest developments in the on-going crisis in relation to BSE.
I had already anticipated addressing you on the Phillips report released earlier this month by the UK Government. However, events in France over the past week clearly call for an earlier discussion of these events.
Only the dangerously complacent or naïve could assume that we have safely put the BSE crisis behind us.
Once more we are reminded that BSE is not an historic event, but a real and present danger.
There has been a worrying increase in the number of cases of BSE detected in France over the past year, in part due to the introduction of targeted testing.
Moreover, the marketing of beef from a herd found to be harbouring a clinical case of BSE ignited public fears over the adequacy of controls to protect public health.
Clearly, we need to look at these developments and draw the appropriate lessons.
That process must begin with a look at the facts.
The current incidence in France is of the order of 7 cases per million cattle aged over two years.
This falls far short of the international criterion of 100 cases per million used to define high incident countries.
However, this relatively low incidence is no reason for complacency.
The fact is that the incidence is rising in several Member States.
In the absence of clear and transparent evidence that the incidence of BSE is falling in all Member States, we must remain extremely vigilant.
More importantly, we must learn from this latest experience.
Let me briefly outline my main observations in this respect.
First, the increased incidence of BSE in France is, in large part, due to the introduction of random testing by the French authorities.
This follows from a Commission decision requiring all Member States to introduce such testing by 1 January 2001.
All Member States should follow the French example.
Second, the absolute necessity for the implementation of rigid controls on BSE cannot be over-emphasised.
The fact is that there is a battery of controls provided by legislation.
If these controls are respected and implemented, the risk to the public is reduced to a minimum.
I will return to this point later.
Third, we must have total transparency in our approach towards BSE.
The consumer reaction to BSE has been variously described as a psychosis, irrational or driven by panic.
A lack of clarity and transparency in addressing the issue has contributed hugely to this unfortunate situation.
Finally, we must not overlook the huge progress in recent years, in the past year in particular, in putting in place a framework to tackle BSE.
In the process, we have also begun the task of ensuring that EU systems are in place to avoid similar tragedies in the future.
I was, frankly, disappointed that there was no acknowledgement in Prime Minister Jospin's statement yesterday of the hugely positive role played by the Community in recent years.
Inspired by this Parliament, the Commission has been the driving force in pressing for the adoption of measures to eradicate BSE. And this was done notwithstanding the frequent lack of support in Member States.
This work is not complete.
Important proposals, for example, on animal waste and on transmissible spongiform encephalopathies, are currently before the Council and Parliament.
The proposal adopted by the Commission last week on the establishment of a European Food Authority is an even more significant initiative.
We must not allow recent events to undermine this progress.
I expect a strong endorsement of the Commission's proposals on the Food Authority from the European Council in Nice - and I note what you, Madam President, said on that issue only very recently.
Parliament can equally signal its commitment to the proposal by giving it the highest priority with a view to its adoption in the shortest possible time.
Returning to the issue in hand, the events of the past few weeks already call for a response.
The Commission view that targeted testing is essential in establishing a true picture of the real incidence of BSE in the Community has been fully vindicated by the test results in France.
However, it is necessary to put in place such tests on a much larger scale.
The public needs reassurance that the controls already in place are effective.
Extensive testing now appears to be the most effective means of providing such reassurance.
The Commission intends to put proposals to the Agriculture Council on Monday next, which will fully answer public demands in this respect.
The European Parliament has been a consistent and strong supporter of such testing and I count on your support for the Commission's approach.
The implications of recent events for the Community measures on meat-and-bone meal are also at issue.
Clearly, explanations are necessary for the increased incidence of BSE, not only in France but also in other Member States.
Time and again the finger of blame points in the direction of contaminated meat-and-bone meal.
France decided, yesterday, to ban meat-and-bone meal on a provisional basis.
I look forward to the forthcoming opinion of AFSSA, the French Food Safety Agency, which will help inform the decision of the French Authorities on whether this provisional measure needs to be continued.
The evidence still strongly suggests that the increased incidence in some Member States has its origin in the period before the introduction of reinforced controls in 1996 and subsequently.
And it is certainly the case that the current controls are very strict.
For instance: there is a ban on the feeding of mammalian meat-and-bone meal to ruminants, notably cattle.
Meat-and-bone meal must be processed, that is, pressure cooked, to very high standards.
Specified risk materials must be removed and destroyed.
Active surveillance measures, including random testing, are in progress to prevent cases of BSE from entering the food and feed chains.
However, these controls can only be effective if properly implemented.
Many inspections by the Commission's Food and Veterinary Office point to weaknesses in the implementation of these controls.
In some cases, the follow-up to these reports in Member States is not taken with the seriousness which it deserves.
This, frankly, is unacceptable.
It is unacceptable on public health grounds.
It is also foolhardy, as the alternative to these controls leads towards an outright ban on meat-and-bone meal with the attendant huge financial and environmental consequences.
Public health and financial considerations, therefore, both argue for strict implementation.
The Commission, for its part, will continue to impress on Member States the importance of this issue.
The Commission's Food and Veterinary Office already affords top priority to Member States' controls in relation to protective measures against BSE.
I am asking the Food and Veterinary Office to carry out once more a fundamental and thorough inspection in the Member States in this respect.
For example, the requirement to remove and destroy SRMs only entered into force from 1 October 2000 and I want urgent on-the-ground confirmation that this requirement is being enforced.
Parliament's assistance in this respect would also be most welcome in alerting the public in the Member States to the importance of these controls.
Moreover, there is currently a major proposal before Parliament and the Council for a regulation on animal waste.
This proposal provides the opportunity for putting in place a comprehensive framework to ensure that all the relevant issues relating to animal waste are addressed.
Again, I hope to work with Parliament in putting this proposal on the statute book as a matter of urgency.
A number of speakers have raised the issue of a total ban on meat-and-bone meal.
Let me add a few comments on what I said earlier in this respect.
In the situation confronting us it is always tempting to look to a magic solution, a solution which can, in one step, both eliminate risk and restore confidence.
I have gone on record in stating that I will be fully transparent with consumers.
This includes in my view the responsibility not to mislead them into believing that there are magic solutions to a very difficult problem.
A total ban on meat-and-bone meal is an example of this.
My only concern in relation to the use of meat-and-bone meal is whether it is safe or not to use in animal feed.
I leave it to others to make the economic and environmental case for its continued use.
In relation to its safety, let me repeat that there is an extensive range of controls already in place to ensure that MBM does not pose a threat of transmission of BSE.
It may be that MBM cannot be fed to ruminants and I have said this already.
The scientific advice is that MBM produced under these conditions is not a danger.
This Parliament also accepts that there is a place for meat-and-bone meal produced under safe conditions.
Parliament acknowledged that in its report on BSE in 1997 and I quote: "The recycling of carcasses and slaughter waste by the production of meat-and-bone meal for animal feed offers the best alternative on economic, environmental and health policy grounds".
As I stated earlier, however, the safe use of meat-and-bone meal is conditional on the required controls being respected and implemented in full.
If there is a weakness in the controls, clearly there is a problem.
I am insisting, once more, that all Member States accept their responsibilities in this respect.
The Commission's Food and Veterinary Office will redouble its efforts to ensure that Member States respect their obligations.
I would add that if the French decision to ban meat-and-bone meal is motivated by fears over the adequacy of their controls it is a decision I fully endorse.
I welcome in this respect that Prime Minister Jospin yesterday also announced a substantial strengthening of controls on the food chain including a big increase in staff.
I will be asking Member States on Monday if there are concerns that weaknesses in the implementation of controls over the past several years, in contravention of the Community legislation in the matter, are a factor in the current increased incidence of BSE.
Finally, Madam President, I would add that the Commission has recently presented a proposal to Parliament under codecision for a regulation on animal waste.
This proposal aims at putting in place a Community framework which will address all relevant issues governing the treatment of animal waste, especially its use in animal feed.
It is notable that in the discussions that have taken place already on this proposal with the Member States, a ban on the feeding of meat-and-bone meal to animals has not been suggested as a necessary measure. By that I mean a total ban.
Instead, the consensus view is that the Community must ensure that only material from animals fit for human consumption should be used in the production of meat-and-bone meal.
It remains to be seen if this changes in the light of current events.
Let me recall, Madam President, in this respect that I succeeded only five months ago in securing the Council's agreement to a ban on the use of specified risk materials in the food and feed chains.
Yes, difficult as it may be to believe, it took four years to agree a measure which I consider to be fundamental to public health protection.
The obstacles in securing support for a ban on meat-and-bone meal should be viewed in this light.
Let me assure you, however, that if and when I consider that a ban on the feeding of meat-and-bone meal to all animals is a necessary measure to protect public health, I will present such a proposal irrespective of the obstacles.
Parliament itself now has its opportunity to shape decisively the future direction of policy towards waste at Community level.
All options are open in this proposal on animal waste including a total ban, if thought necessary.
I await your report and suggested amendments and assure you of my full cooperation for suggested improvements.
Madam President, the fact is that we would not have needed today's debate at all if all the Member States had immediately and fully implemented the requirements of the BSE Temporary Committee of Inquiry into BSE and the BSE follow-up committee of February and November 1997.
I am also willing to concede that the Commission, no doubt because of enormous pressure from the European Parliament, has made great progress in recent years in gaining acceptance for the principle of precautionary consumer protection.
But implementation by the Member States has still been too slow.
Surely it is possible both to act quickly and to do the job properly.
The public cannot understand why our legislative process is so slow in times of crisis.
That is also why I wish to say here that the Commission must have powers at such times of crisis to take more rapid decisions in relation to infringements of Community law or when there is an imminent risk of such infringement, and that it should be in a position to take action in the public interest or if public health is threatened.
I also wish to say that there must be solid grounds for bans within the single market.
The measures that have been agreed for animal identification and meat labelling will provide an important basis for consumer safety and confidence.
It is always better to tackle the root of a problem than to indulge in populism.
It is time we all finally escaped from this vicious cycle of speculation and mutual recrimination, in which BSE now seems to stand for "Blame Somebody Else"!
That is why I specifically support the joint motion for a resolution calling on us to leave behind this atmosphere of suspicion and universally introduce rapid testing methods for BSE not only for animals affected, not only for animals over 18 months, but for all animals involved in the food chain, if at all possible.
(Applause)
This will give us a basis for more extensive and objective criteria for assessing the risk of BSE or the absence of BSE in Member States and allow us to take new and more far-reaching decisions.
Mr President-in-Office, I specifically call on the Council to make known its opinion on the TSE regulation.
(Applause)
We completed the first reading in May.
It is a scandal, if BSE is causally related with scrapie, that there is still no joint preventative legislation.
Indeed, France has the right to ban animal meal for reasons of domestic policy.
But what may be right for France in this situation is not necessarily right for all Member States.
It is good that in this respect we are adhering to the joint decisions adopted in 1997, as Mr Byrne explained.
A recycling system that functions well in part has been ruined because safety factors have been disregarded.
I shall be quite open about this: what we will be calling for in the motion for a resolution tomorrow - a temporary general ban on the production and use of animal meal in feedingstuffs until all criteria relating to standards and safe origins have been met, together with the implementation of the Commission proposal to eliminate affected animals for good - is hard for many Member States, but we are going along with it because without society's backing we will have problems in the long run.
However, it must also be possible to use animal parts approved for human consumption in animal feed as well in the future.
We also need to think about the budget.
A BSE test for all animals cofinanced by the Community would cost EUR 130 million.
Reserves also need to be earmarked in case redevelopment measures should be necessary.
With that in mind we will also use the trialogue and the budget concertation process with the Commission and the Council to ensure that the Commission's rectifying letter for the 2001 budget is also amended with a view to making the necessary provisions.
(Applause)
Madam President, I have lost count of how many times we have discussed this over the last four years and of how often I have spoken on this subject.
I particularly admire your courage, Mr President-in-Office, in coming here today, because I am sure that apart from the rhetorical boxing round the ears you have received from Mr Böge, you will also be on the receiving end of some other harsh words as a stand-in - and I wish to make that point clear - for your fellow Members of the Council of Ministers.
We have brought in legislation, starting with our exposure of the BSE scandal, which, for years, the Council wanted to sweep under the carpet.
We have produced excellent legislation.
Let me mention some examples for you: the ban on feeding animal meal to ruminants, animal meal production methods and the removal of risk materials.
Where was the Council when this legislation had to be implemented?
How long did the Commission have to put up with getting a bloody nose in the Council of Ministers before the removal of risk materials was legislated on?
Why did this Council, which attaches so much importance to consumer protection and which now acts as if public health were its top priority, not act earlier and say that this could also be achieved without legislation?
You, Mr President-in-Office, and all your colleagues would have been in a position to take appropriate measures in the Member States long before the Commission, unfortunately somewhat belatedly, brought forward its proposal to process only those animal parts suitable for human consumption into animal meal.
This could have been a Council initiative.
I really wonder why we had to do battle with the Council about beef labelling in the European Court of Justice.
Was that necessary?
I also wish to ask you, Mr President-in-Office, in relation to your reference to France's policy, why it has taken France so long to transpose the legislation on animal meal manufacturing methods?
I fail to understand that.
Nor can I understand why France could not transpose the provisions on the pressure, temperature and heating time for the production of animal meal more quickly.
As Mr Böge has already said - he and I were rapporteurs for the TSE regulation - we had our first reading on 17 May.
Where is the Council common position, if this is so important?
Excuse me, Mr President-in-Office, if I make a rather heretical assumption, namely that you personally are certainly very interested in public health and in consumer health, but time and again I cannot help feeling that the Council considers market organisation and economic aspects to be much more compelling.
And the moment, as you would put it, public hysteria breaks out, there is immediate concern about beef markets collapsing. Then you react.
I would say to you with one small reservation, Mr President-in-Office, that I am very interested to know when those countries which have today agreed a universal ban on animal meal in feedingstuffs will open the door again by saying that animal meal is now being produced safely and we can feed it to animals once more.
But I shall be very calm and wait for you to tell me something new here.
I will tell you exactly what we need, ladies and gentlemen - we need two things.
The first is good legislation.
We have already put large parts of this in place, and we are trying to take this further, and we need to act quickly.
It is up to you to deliver this legislation quickly.
Up to now the Council has acted as a very major brake on this. All 15 Members of the Council have dragged their feet.
And I can tell you that worked very well, it was very effective.
Once we have good legislation we need controls. That is why I am very grateful that our joint motion for a resolution, which I hope will be adopted almost unanimously tomorrow, contains a requirement for the Member States to report on their controls.
I would like to know when Germany, France, Sweden, Austria and all the other countries have carried out health checks on the production of animal feed, and when veterinary checks have been carried out, and how many poor overworked veterinary officers there are, and whether you are recruiting any new ones at all.
If you are serious about all this, then you do not need a token Food Authority, which might prepare legislation on food safety, but which is not in a position to deliver what we can: good legislation and controls.
That is your job, Mr President-in-Office.
Madam President, I would be delighted if this were to be my last speech on this subject in this House, because we really must get this sorted out sooner or later!
Madam President, France' s ban on animal meal in feedingstuffs came far too late.
In this situation, the only way to break the cycle of BSE infection is to place a complete ban on the use of animal meal as feed.
As long as it cannot be guaranteed that meal from deceased animals is not being mixed with animal meal that is free from infection, then all animal meal must be banned for use as feed.
One must not be wise after the event, but I find it extremely difficult in this debate not to think back to the beginning of the Nineties when, as the Swedish person responsible for the agricultural negotiations, I was forced to negotiate an opt-out because we in Sweden had a ban on the use of meal from deceased animals.
We only just managed to obtain such an opt-out, but we managed it, even if we were laughed at to some extent and told that there was, of course, no danger.
Now, no one is laughing any more.
That was, in actual fact, how it was, Mr President-in-Office of the Council.
You mentioned, of course, that a faulty production method was to blame and that it is for this reason that animal meal has been banned in France.
That was why we, back home in Sweden, banned it a long time ago.
It appeared that faulty is precisely what these production methods are, and they must be opposed from the beginning.
I want to emphasise a further couple of points. In the resolution that I hope will be voted through tomorrow, there are some very important points.
The first is that it must be possible to trace every raw material in every type of food back through the chain.
In a situation such as that which has now arisen in France, and also earlier on in many other countries, it is important to be able to tell consumers where the products they buy come from and how their origins can be traced.
This is an extremely important requirement, especially where the specific issue of BSE is concerned.
Secondly, it is important to emphasise - and this is not some new idea - that anyone who consciously allows an animal that is sick, or that is suspected of being sick, to enter the food or feed chain is committing a criminal offence.
Every food producer must be aware of this fact.
Clearly, many people suffer, of course, in this situation, especially many farmers.
In certain circumstances, it is necessary to slaughter the entire stock of animals, which must come as a real blow.
It is also important to remember that the national systems for eradicating this terrible infection must include measures which properly compensate farmers for the financial losses they suffer in this connection.
On this subject, I want to point out that those of us in the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party have tabled an amendment I hope will be voted through.
In conclusion, I just want to thank Commissioner Byrne, who I think is doing a good job on this issue.
Madam President, Minister, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, the Commission and the European Parliament have a duty to react in the face of the concern of consumers and European farmers over food safety.
The BSE crisis is now a public health problem, if not a problem of society.
The Commission and the Council are unable to respond satisfactorily, with their hands on their hearts and the precautionary principle on their lips, at the same time confining themselves to an acute mania for meetings and to vague decisions.
Countless measures may have been taken at a Community level, but they are either badly implemented or simply inadequate.
We must move on to practical proposals and provide the necessary resources to implement them.
As a first step, our group is calling for the immediate imposition of systematic testing for BSE throughout the European Union and, at the same time, for the use of MBMs in animal feed to be completely suspended on a temporary basis.
Today, Mr Böge, those who are claiming they have no incidence of mad cow disease on their territory are those who are not looking for it.
The practices of intensive farming have been the same everywhere.
So we must have an exact overview of the situation, country by country.
Our group is calling for an immediate ban on MBMs for all livestock as long as Member States are unable to guarantee the implementation of laws preventing BSE and the strict application of European directives.
Commissioner, Minister, we must have strict controls in order to guarantee that specified risk materials are separated out throughout the entire animal food chain.
The Commission proposal to eliminate animal matter which cannot be consumed by humans from animal feed must also be implemented.
MBMs which largely become, even if only temporarily, a new form of waste may be burnt in cement kilns or used to produce biogas.
Replacement solutions exist as far as feed for livestock is concerned.
MBMs make up but a small percentage of their diet, a fact we often forget.
The grass in our meadows, white clover and vetch - currently neglected by the CAP - may provide satisfactory solutions for the safety of animal feed and human food.
It is possible to save livestock production by reforming an agricultural economic system which, even today, makes farmers and consumers hostages to multinationals that are more interested in profit than in food safety.
Policies must change this situation so that those who are really responsible for this crisis can be penalised and so that precise decisions can make it possible for a first step to be taken towards ending this tragic crisis.
This is the thrust of the joint resolution.
It is a heavy responsibility, but we were elected to take it on in full.
Madam President, I believe that the BSE crisis that broke out in 1996 has revealed the extent to which ultraliberalism can lead to the health of consumers and the interests of livestock producers being sacrificed.
The work of this Parliament' s committee of enquiry contributed to the application of measures to protect consumer health: in particular by banning animal meal for cattle and through the compulsory labelling of beef.
But fraud, negligence and the lack of adequate measures mean that the BSE crisis is still not under control, since new cases are being discovered all the time.
Without becoming paranoid, we must recognise that the consumers' concern is perfectly legitimate.
My group believes that the health of consumers is an imperative which should have overriding priority over all other considerations.
It is therefore urgent that measures are taken to reassure consumers and to restore their confidence in food safety.
I do not know if this is a panacea, Commissioner but, in line with the precautionary principle, it seems to me that experience behoves us to ban, as of today, the use of animal meal in feed for livestock, including pigs, poultry and fish.
Detection tests must also be extended to all cattle entering the human food chain.
The current crisis has led to a significant slump in sales and to a fall in prices, which are hurting livestock producers and all those involved in the beef sector.
It is necessary both to restore consumer confidence and to help the livestock producers affected by the crisis.
Selective aid, such as market support and a grass subsidy, are essential.
But, beyond the immediate future, should we not be reflecting on the mechanisms of the CAP?
Are these not the very mechanisms which are at the root of the problem?
They have contributed to overly intensive production, which has harmed the environment and the quality of farm products.
They therefore need to be reviewed.
Perhaps it would be no bad thing if animals returned to traditional fodder.
I feel like saying, "Yes, let them have a bit more grass."
But the European Union must also encourage the production of oil seeds so that animal meal can be replaced by vegetable meal.
To achieve this, there would have to be a re-examination of the 1993 GATT agreement, which prohibits the European Union producing more than 25% of its vegetable protein requirements so as to satisfy US exports.
Madam President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, the BSE crisis has turned into a case of collective paranoia.
The justified mistrust of consumers threatens the entire beef sector and the spectre of ruin haunts our livestock producers and small artisanal enterprises.
This has come to pass because the incompetence of governments has been aggravated by our own inability to respond to the twofold challenge before us: the health challenge and the economic challenge.
I will not detail the horrors that have been committed on all sides.
I find the debate that is underway in this Chamber, which consists in finding out which institution out of the Council, the Commission or Parliament has done the most and which the least, rather unnecessary.
The reality is something else.
The facts stand, and they are appalling.
We were aware of the dangers of animal meal, we were aware of the dangers of specified risk materials.
The scientific authorities clearly stated that the development of the disease in cattle was not under control and they pinpointed the alarming growth in the numbers of animals affected.
I believe that the Commission has failed miserably.
The labelling of beef that was agreed on, which is a minimum form of labelling and only came into force two and a half months ago, does not make it possible for the origin of animals to be adequately traced, and we were very slow to ban specified risk materials.
The management of the crisis has been terribly poor, and there were tragic shortcomings in our ability to anticipate the foreseeable consequences of the crisis.
Where are the programmes to reduce the deficit of proteins in the European Union, to which reference was made a few moments ago?
Where are the programmes to incinerate animal meal and animal waste and to implement obligatory testing throughout the European Union?
The truth is that this is a problem affecting the European Union as a whole, not just a single country.
The truth is that food quality has been sacrificed on the altar of productivity, the standardisation of lifestyles and flavourless products.
Consumers used to have doubts about quality; today they worry about their own health.
Our citizens know - because we cannot lie to people with impunity - that the crisis is serious.
They know that if we are discovering sick animals in France, it is because we are looking for them, as was said earlier.
We need far-reaching measures to be adopted at a national and European level if we want to avoid economic bankruptcy and a major health scare.
We need to adopt the proposals put forward by the President-in-Office of the European Council, especially those banning animal meal in feed in all sectors of animal production.
But we also need two additional, comprehensive plans, and I am calling for their immediate implementation, because any delay through hesitation would exacerbate the health and economic risks.
The measures adopted by the French Government in this regard are, as I said, inadequate.
Firstly, as others have said before me, we must have systematic screening of all cattle slaughtered for consumption by European citizens.
For more than a year, the European authorities have been examining three screening tests, including the French test, which is deemed to be the most reliable and the most sensitive.
This test can be developed on an industrial scale very quickly.
It has to be done, without hesitation and without delay, and on a massive scale.
Just now, I heard reference being made to random tests.
Random tests are not going to restore consumer confidence, or producer confidence for that matter.
Public opinion must be fully informed of the characteristics of the test I am talking about.
The French screening test for BSE was developed at the CEA (a public-sector research institute).
In June it was assessed by Directorate General 24 of the European Commission, which is responsible for consumer protection, and, in July 1999, it was transferred to an industrial partner.
This test was developed with a view to protecting the consumer, so that it could be extensively used in slaughterhouses, thus preventing animals dangerous to human health entering the food chain.
The results of the European assessment, which were published in July 1999, suggest that it is 10 to 300 times more sensitive than the three other tests assessed at the same time.
A new study undertaken in September 2000 has been evaluated by the European Commission. It confirms the preceding results in terms of sensitivity.
The sensitivity of this test guarantees that contaminated animals cannot possibly enter the food chain.
The result of the examination can be obtained within 5 hours, and the test can be made widely available, as hundreds of millions of samples a year can be produced easily.
Its immediate widespread use in the veterinary laboratories of the French departments would simply require the allocation of sufficient human resources until it can be automated.
The test exists, it is reliable, and it can be carried out on a massive scale.
I hope I have convinced you that it needs to be done.
Secondly, Community farming needs to be reorganised to put our set-aside lands back into production so that we can grow soya, alfalfa and peas, which will give us the replacement proteins we are lacking and which will feed our animals much better than American GMOs.
We sacrificed our soya, alfalfa and peas in the course of the COM negotiations in Marrakech.
Well, the thing with poor agreements is that they should be challenged, especially when public health dictates this.
By displaying courage and ambition, we can combine the health interests of Europeans and the economic interests of our producers, and thereby restore confidence.
This will only be possible if there is no longer any doubt in the public mind, in other words, if screening is, as I would insist, systematic.
Unless there is mandatory general testing, confidence will not be restored, for confidence cannot be restored by decree; it has to be earned.
These are the reasons why my group has signed the motion for a resolution which will be presented to this House tomorrow, which, I hope, will be adopted with, if not a unanimous vote, at least a very large majority, so that everybody can be made aware that this Parliament is in direct touch with the problems affecting European citizens.
(Applause from the UEN Group)
Madam President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, Commissioner, I would like to take this opportunity to denounce the scandalous eviction from this Chamber of our colleague, Jean-Marie Le Pen, who would have been able to remind us that the group representing the European right-wing parties was the first, by a long chalk, to reveal to this House, in September 1990, that the pathogenic agent for BSE was able to jump species and to spread to humans.
What were the reactions at the time?
Nothing but sarcastic comments and criticisms came from these benches and from the political class while the media maintained a scornful silence.
Back then, Mr President-in-Office, you did virtually nothing, just as your colleagues have done virtually nothing about the fallout from Chernobyl, the AIDS epidemic or contaminated blood, and always for the same reason: so as not to panic public opinion.
The former Commissioner, Mr MacSharry, justified this criminal silence by claiming that the beef sector must not be put at risk and that consumers must not be panicked.
Now, we are faced with a health and economic catastrophe of unparalleled proportions causing widespread panic amongst consumers.
In the face of predictable reactions from the public, you hastily pronounce a ban on animal meal for all animals, in line with the infamous precautionary principle.
Despite the opinion of experts and scientists, who had shown that these MBMs were behind the development and transmission of the pathogenic agent for BSE, you forget to mention in your analysis that the situation is first and foremost due to Anglo-Saxon meal producers who, for commercial reasons, lowered the cooking temperature for MBMs.
Mr President-in-Office, you also fail to mention that France continued to import possibly contaminated MBMs from the UK after 1989, the year in which they were banned, especially via Belgium.
The result is a reflection of the impotence of the political class.
There have been almost a hundred cases of BSE in France in 2000 and, so far, 80 people have died from variant CJD in the UK and two in France.
Minister, Commissioner, why has it been necessary to wait until 1 October 2000 before banning the specified risk materials in the European Union, even though they are highly infectious?
Why wait until 1 January 2001 before bringing in the rapid screening tests which Mr Pasqua mentioned just now?
And what about the labelling and traceability system, which will not be complete until 2003, despite the risks for consumers and the absence of a total guarantee for livestock producers?
Now, in a panic, you resign yourselves to action.
But, faced with the crisis, it is necessary to guarantee health and food protection for consumers and an income for livestock producers, butchers, tripe butchers and wholesalers alike, all of whom are victims of the negligence of the public authorities, at both national and Community level.
These people are in no way responsible for the crisis, which is why the European Union must show solidarity with them.
We must condemn those who are really responsible for the crisis - the Anglo-American producers of MBMs - and we must, if necessary, prosecute them if they were aware of the dangers they were causing.
We must acknowledge the special responsibility of the Commission, as called for by the committee of enquiry of this Parliament.
There are four real causes of this situation: unchecked profiteering; the violation of natural laws which hoped to turn herbivores into carnivores; the watering down of responsibilities, by transferring sovereignty from nation states to the Brussels eurocracy and finally, your policy of untrammelled free-trade.
These are the real causes of the crisis, and it is only by tackling these causes that you will be able to permanently solve this appalling problem, which you helped to create.
Madam President, on behalf of all livestock producers may I express my deep concern at the French Government ban on meat-and-bone meal in animal feed.
Although a French action, it has widespread international implications.
The main substitute for MBM is soya protein.
The French ban will create a massive increase in demand, yet supply of this commodity is limited.
The result will be exceptionally heavy pressure on prices.
Finished animal feed costs throughout Europe could rise by as much as 20 or 30%.
Since feed costs amount to 60% of overheads, producers will be heavily squeezed.
This may prove to be the last straw for thousands of small pig-farming businesses.
Furthermore, the ban creates considerable stress in the slaughtering sector.
Waste products could be sold to processors for £25 a ton.
They now cost £75 a ton for disposal.
For a medium-sized slaughterhouse killing 2,500 pigs a week, this adds £120,000 a year to costs, very little of which can be recouped.
As to the way out, more funding of the agricultural sector is not the solution.
We need species-specific feedmeals dedicated to specific livestock sectors so that MBM can continue to be supplied to the pig and poultry markets without fear of cross-contamination to the bovine sector.
If that can be done, there will be no need for a continuing ban or for extra subsidies.
Madam President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, Commissioner, this debate has one thing in its favour; that at least it is highlighting the differences of opinion that exist among us, especially between the Council and the Commission.
I too do not accept the arrogance of certain Member States which, since they do not apply the tests, are not pushing for regulations.
This is unacceptable.
If France is now in the situation in which it finds itself, it is because it practises controls which do not exist elsewhere.
Now, it is not just a matter of a crisis in the beef sector, it is a public health problem, and we are also faced with an economic crisis.
The health of European consumers must be a top priority in all decisions that are adopted.
The entire food chain is at the heart of this problem.
Consumers have lost confidence and, in order to contain this phenomenon, there must be systematic BSE tests on cattle and sheep.
Farmers themselves are demanding them.
Adopting emergency measures and common sense measures by banning the use of MBMs for all species would indeed be a practical application of the precautionary principle!
Commissioner, I have always had a great deal of confidence in you, but I do not understand why you are being so reluctant to act.
How can you imagine that you are applying the precautionary principle if you are refusing to ban MBMs?
Mr Byrne, you are well aware that no MBMs are completely safe.
It is by adopting measures of this kind that consumers will be reassured and that farmers who support this idea, especially as voiced by their unions, will hear the message of solidarity that we want to send them.
There are no scientific certainties with regard to the transmission of the disease to other species.
But what we are certain of is that we must restore consumer confidence and support the farming sector.
Let nobody tell me that we cannot destroy MBMs!
We have wasted a lot of time. We should have put the necessary tools to incinerate these meals in place years ago.
Let nobody tell me that we are unable to replace these MBMs!
Commissioner, I am sorry that your colleague responsible for agriculture is not here and that he does not have the courage to face us and to explain that it is necessary to completely overhaul the common agricultural policy.
I condemn the limitations and the worrying consequences of this policy.
A reform of the CAP is not just necessary, it is indispensable, because it is intolerable that a European country should adopt draconian measures and jeopardise its economy.
European solidarity must also play a role, because our policy has exposed its inconsistencies: set-aside, animal meal for cattle, nitrates, pesticides.
The CAP must be reorganised to encourage farmers.
Production must be improved, and the budget of the CAP must be used to reorganise this policy.
Madam President, less than four weeks ago the Commission adopted a proposal for a regulation on health rules for animal by-products not intended for human consumption.
The aim of this is to avoid not only microbiological but also chemical contamination of feedingstuffs in future.
In my opinion, the scope of this proposal is already wide, and it takes account of the precautionary principle.
In the interests of a sustainable closed substance cycle it should still be possible to use properly tested animal materials deemed fit for human consumption in the production of feedingstuffs.
We have to be realistic.
There is no scientific justification for a general ban on using animal meal for all animals. Why should it cover pigs, poultry and fish, as some Member States and some Members here have been demanding?
If you take the arguments of some Members of this House to their logical conclusion, you would also have to ban sales of wild boar meat.
What is far more important, in the spirit of the Commission proposal, is to work towards ensuring that animal meal complies with the highest safety standards.
Farms and factories that do not at present apply the highest technological standards to animal meal production should have their production licence withdrawn until they can demonstrate that they are meeting those standards.
Regular and strict checks of technological standards and compliance with legislation on animal meal production should form part of a comprehensive safety concept.
Madam President, we have certainly been through a lot with the BSE crisis.
It has led to the resignation of a Commission, a British government was voted out partly because of it and now there is an internal policy crisis in France - who knows where it will all end!
There are people and countries who are using the BSE crisis as a political instrument.
For example, the president of one country has stood up and announced that no more animal meal is to be used as animal feed - animal meal that should never have been fed to animals in the first place, because France has not complied with the standards.
And the health minister of one of Germany's Länder recently stated that she was demanding a new import ban on English and French beef.
This minister had refused to introduce the tests which we called for in association with lifting this ban.
That would have given us tests in Germany and thus, scientific proof, either that there is no BSE or that cases do actually exist.
Had that happened, we would not now be complaining that we have been put in an undesirable category just because we asserted that we were BSE-free.
Then Mr Gollnisch turns round and tells this House that his group has been spearheading the BSE debate.
Mr Gollnisch, I do not recall your group contributing to the Temporary Committee of Inquiry into BSE.
You played no part in it whatsoever.
Then the President-in-Office comes along and tells this House what measures he now intends to take.
Of course, what you say is quite right, Mr President-in-Office.
But what you told us goes without saying, it is blindingly obvious!
It is European law!
We urgently need to give the Commission the mechanisms it requires, and that is something that should be done in Nice.
And if new threats arise in future - Mr Böge has already referred to this - the Commission needs powers to close down factories, negotiate and impose sanctions immediately, so that years do not have to pass before we recognise what needs to be done in scientific and political terms and take action!
That is the real scandal, and this is not, for the moment at least, a matter for the Commission.
We have to recognise that, Mr Byrne, and I welcome your contribution today.
But it was indeed a matter for the Commission at one point!
Now it is down to the Member States, who do not want to implement the legislation!
We have a key role to play in exerting pressure here.
This is now a European problem.
That is why I have taken the liberty of talking about France and Germany, because we have to recognise that this is a European problem and stop indulging in national squabbling!
We need to establish a precautionary policy for the European public as a whole, and we have done that in a solid and rational way here.
I accordingly welcome the motion for a resolution.
We have not let ourselves be lured into calling for a total ban on animal meal, because in that case we would have had to call for a total ban on meat, because if what is deemed fit for us to eat can no longer be fed to animals, that is not just nonsense, it is political populism!
We need to steer clear of that and to carry on working in the same sensible way as before!
(Applause)
Madam President, I would advise the Commission not to be so sure of itself or, more importantly, of its forecasts for the future.
I tabled a question on the danger of BSE in December 1995, three months before the scandal broke.
The Commission replied to the effect that there was absolutely no problem and no cause for concern.
So a little modesty is in order, I think.
I also have a question for the Commission: have you measured the cost today of the current policy of cheap meat-and-bone meal and the cost of doing away with it and supporting vegetable production?
I am no longer so sure that meat-and-bone meal, together with the cost of controls and the risks, is any cheaper.
Thirdly, the whole House is talking about controls.
When did the Commission carry out controls?
Does it have the capacity to do so? Which countries have been referred to the European Court for failing to apply the law?
For example, Madam President, for failing to comply with beef labelling, on which I acted as Parliament's rapporteur.
Does every country apply it?
I have yet to see labels in Athens.
Has the Commission referred anyone to the European Court?
I am sure that we would be most interested in knowing so that we could continue the debate.
As far as the rest is concerned, for once, I agree wholeheartedly with what the honourable lady members, Mrs Ainardi, Mrs Auroi and Mrs Grossetête, said.
Madam President, one of the primary objectives of the European Parliament, the Commission and the Council must continue to be guaranteeing food safety by enforcing effective laws and performing stringent controls which will restore consumer confidence.
All this must be carried out in a climate of transparency and regularity so that the citizens do not feel that they are being swindled or sacrificed on the altar of major economic interests.
We must prevent animals suffering from BSE entering the food chain.
We therefore need to develop an effective control system in all the Member States of the European Union.
It is becoming vital to stop using meat-and-bone meal until it is proven unequivocally that using these feedingstuffs will not spread the disease.
The panic spreading throughout the public is destroying an entire sector, and those who are least to blame - the breeders - are worst affected, for it is precisely the breeders, and not those responsible, who are the victims of the situation.
Breeders feed their livestock on products supplied by the industries, and a similar situation occurred in Belgium a few months ago with the matter of dioxins in chickens.
We call for financial subsidies to assist breeders so that they do not have to bear all the costs of the crisis.
We also feel that it would be appropriate to ensure that every outbreak of the disease is contained and to place a ban on the export of meat until such time as it is proven to be safe to eat.
Madam President, I would like to go into the financial implications of the matter, partly in my capacity as rapporteur for the agricultural budget.
We have talked enough about the procedural aspect and the ins and outs of the whole BSE issue.
A trialogue on Budget 2001 is due to start tomorrow.
Yesterday, the coordinators of the various parties in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development lent their support to the proposal to earmark EUR 600 million of the EUR 1.3 billion still available in the agricultural budget for the fight against BSE.
I understand that it would cost upwards of EUR 150 million to test all slaughtered cows older than two years in the European Union.
Well then, Council and Commission, you have a fair amount of financial leeway on which to base your robust policy.
Let there be no more discussion of this 600 million in the negotiations between Parliament, the Council and the Commission.
The scope is there in the budget, you have Parliament' s backing on this, and now that everything is in place, it is up to you to see that the funds needed for a robust BSE policy actually hit the mark.
My second remark concerns the procedures.
It is noticeable that there is still no official mention of BSE on the official agenda of the Council of Agriculture Ministers due to take place this coming Monday and Tuesday.
I ask myself how this is possible when last week, on Wednesday 8 November, the European cattle farmers in the COPA association came together for emergency consultations and proposed robust measures?
How can consumer organisations really make their voices heard?
We are obviously giving the impression in this public debate that we move at snail' s pace when it comes to the implementation of policy by the Council and the Commission, which is totally unacceptable.
I urge you to pursue a robust policy, or a different one at any rate.
A number of points have been made about the implementation of legislation.
I would remind you though, that no human being can go without food, not for a single day.
On no account should we fail to give this priority its due from the political perspective.
Should it already be a problem with regard to inadequate levels of protein and other products, then I can assure you that European agriculture has sufficient potential to absorb this, also with regard to cattle feed.
Mr President, like many others, I want to thank Commissioner Byrne for his customary vigilance and also the French Minister for being here today.
As an Englishman, I welcome the measures the French have taken.
There is a general acknowledgement that BSE, which began as a British disease and today is being presented as a French crisis, is really a European disease - a European problem - and it must be tackled on that basis.
There should not be any recriminations between the nation states or between different generations of government on this issue.
We must tackle this.
The Minister said that MBM was a low-cost foodstuff.
It is not a low-cost food stuff if it helps to spread BSE and its human derivative.
That is the essential problem here today.
Many speakers have said that we need to extend the ban on meat-and-bone meal as a mammalian food stuff.
The UK already bans it from all farm livestock.
Our own Food Standards Agency will be pronouncing very soon on intra-species recycling, and I hope they will condemn it also.
We need to take these precautions, and we need to take them quickly for the benefit of all the countries of Europe.
Mr Byrne did not say very much today, as he was widely trailed to have done, about testing.
I am glad that we are still looking at the extension of testing on an experimental basis.
There are still doubts about the validity of tests, particularly on younger animals, and we have heard from other speakers about the huge size of the herd in Europe that would have to be tested even if old animals are to be taken out of the food chain.
Lastly, we must make greater speed in urging the Council to act on our behalf.
Everyone has said that and everyone knows it to be true.
You must move. We have just heard that it took four years to agree a ban on SRMs in the food chain.
We do not have another four years.
We may not have another one year.
We must take precautions now, not just on behalf of those of us who are concerned, but on behalf of the complacent minority of Member States as well.
It is for their benefit that we do it.
Madam President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, Commissioner, I am happy to hear within this Chamber that the CAP must be changed at all costs.
I would just like to remind certain people that the Greens were indeed alone when, at the top of their voices, they called for the reform of the CAP.
With regard to BSE, I welcome the French decision, but the Presidency must not forget that it too must assume its responsibilities as far as food safety at the European level is concerned.
I would like to make two points in this connection.
I regret that neither the Council nor the Commission has stressed the absolute and immediate need to bring grass and oil seed subsidies in line with those for cereals in order to avoid genetically modified soya being used to make up for the lack of proteins next year.
I also believe that criminal and fraudulent acts should not continue to go unpunished.
It is outrageous that, after three BSE crises in the space of a decade, no guilty party has been identified or brought to book.
This impunity cannot go on.
That is why I am calling on the European Union to carry out the necessary investigations among manufacturers of MBMs and knackers in order to find those responsible for these health, economic and social disasters.
Madam President, I would like to make three points.
Firstly, to respond to the justified and very demanding need of European consumers for food safety, we are going to place the bar of controls and precautions at an extremely high level.
But if we introduce generalised screening tests, if we destroy MBMs, if we impose the slaughter of an entire herd for just one sick animal, we must demand strictly equivalent health standards from the third countries who are our commercial partners and who seek to export live animals, carcasses and meat products to the Community.
Secondly, even before this crisis, the Community suffered a serious deficit in vegetable proteins, since we accepted, at Blair House, an incredible limitation on our oil-seed production to 30% of our requirements, just to please the United States and its soya exporters.
Now, the Community cannot cultivate more than 5.5 million hectares of oil seeds, nor does it have the right to do so, even though our needs are in the order of 18 million hectares.
That is why food manufacturers have had to make extensive use of MBMs in their products.
In the future, when these MBMs are banned, we are going to need millions of additional hectares of oil seed crops.
This crisis underscores the absurd nature of the concessions made by the European Union within the framework of the GATT.
We denounced this here in Parliament, when Jimmy Goldsmith was here.
We have the land, the climate and the necessary knowledge to immediately replace MBMs with non-genetically modified vegetable protein, but instead, while financing set-aside, we have given up the right to grow, on our own land, the vegetable proteins we urgently need to feed our animals and our people.
That is why our group has tabled an amendment calling on the Council and the Commission to find ways of re-launching, in Europe, the farming of vegetable proteins to replace, to great advantage, prion-ridden MBMs and transgenic American soya.
We also ask that the disastrous Blair House Agreement, which binds our oil seed producers hand and foot, should be renegotiated within the framework of the COM.
Finally, it is the duty of the Community to come to the assistance of all the beef sector operators who are the victims of the profound destabilisation of their markets in order to help them fund the costs of obligatory testing and the destruction of animal residues which have been withdrawn from the food chain, as well as the costs of vital promotion measures.
Otherwise, there will no longer be any point in talking about a common agricultural policy.
Madam President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, when we began our work on BSE in the Temporary Committee of Inquiry into BSE, the very first thing we had to do was to expose and overcome cover-ups, secretiveness and deceit, and to take measures which, overall, have been very successful and offer a way forward in solving the problem of BSE.
We have already heard many times today that the real problem facing us is to implement the decisions we have already taken.
Mr Byrne, I am extremely grateful that so far you have made excellent progress in putting into practice the undertaking that you gave when you were appointed.
You have brought forward proposals such as the White Paper and the hygiene regulations, and I can assure you that Parliament will deal swiftly with those hygiene regulations.
We will work quickly enough for them to be effectively implemented in the new few years.
But I am not aware of anything happening at Council level here.
There are only declarations and opinions, but no decisions as regards directives or regulations.
What I find incredible is this tug of war in the Council over meat exports and imports.
This seems to be all about emotions.
The public's feelings have really been whipped up, with the sole aim of securing the market for each country's own beef.
Nothing else has happened!
Now emotions are being stirred up again with dramatic announcements about banning animal meal as feed for all animals.
If you would only implement what we agreed, then you would not need to worry about all this any more.
It reminds me of witch-hunts in the Middle Ages.
We are pursuing "sinners" who are not guilty at all.
The causes are to be found somewhere else altogether.
I would like to suggest rapid introduction of these tests that you too are proposing, Commissioner, and not as spot checks, but for every animal slaughtered, without any age restrictions.
Only then can we say to the public "This meat has been tested and you can eat it".
There really is no better solution.
I have worked out the cost - 10 cents per kilo.
So we do not need to argue here about millions of euros - every member of the public will happily pay this, I am quite sure of that!
Madam President, Commissioner, Minister, we must all start from a basic, binding assumption.
It is intolerable that raw materials or compound feedingstuffs should be dangerous for animals or human beings.
Man's food must be safe to eat.
At this time, in addition to the developments and progress in our legislation, we must send the citizens a loud, unambiguous message.
We must reassure the public that the Europe of rights does genuinely protect the rights enshrined in its Treaties and in the Fundamental Charter of European Rights.
I am sure, Commissioner, that Parliament will lend you all the support necessary for the new initiatives.
We need clear measures.
I feel that, until it is proved otherwise, a total ban on meat-and-bone meal has become necessary, just as the introduction of general testing and the harmonisation and effective implementation of Community legislation in all the Member States is necessary, and just as it is necessary not just to monitor the application of new labelling rules but to bring forward the introduction of these rules to the earliest possible juncture.
I will end by affirming this principle: the cost of these measures will certainly be very high, but our priority is health.
Secondly, without these guarantees, the fall in consumption will impact negatively upon the entire industry.
Therefore, consumers and producers must unite to obtain greater guarantees of the inviolable principle that food should be healthy.
Madam President, I am very pleased that the Commission is finally making a strong case for universal testing, because as the situation in France demonstrates "he who seeks shall find"!
Commissioner, I urge you to ensure that these tests are also carried out in other Member States.
It is not acceptable if Germany, for example, does not introduce universal testing, but just tests in North Rhine-Westphalia, for fear of no longer having BSE-free status.
That cannot, of course, be allowed to happen and I can therefore only hope that the Commission will exert the strongest pressure on those Member States that do not carry out tests because they are afraid of losing their BSE-free status.
This amounts to deliberately putting consumers at risk and, as such, is unacceptable.
What we need here is a wide-ranging information campaign.
However, I firmly refute the Commission's suggestion that banning the use of animal meal in feedingstuffs now is panic-mongering.
Quite the contrary!
I think that France has set an excellent example by finally deciding to take this step.
I find it bordering on the cynical, Mr Byrne, when you say that this should not happen on environmental grounds.
You cannot in all seriousness expect us to eat hazardous waste just to solve the waste disposal problem!
All in all, I regard it as somewhat shameful that there is so much talk here about compensating farmers and animal breeders.
Perhaps we should think about the victims for a change, and all the relatives of people who have died of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease.
Commissioner, I listened to what you said very carefully and was most surprised when, at one point in your speech, you said that you did not have a magic solution to this problem.
My reply to you is that we do not need magic solutions, we need two things: first, we need to accept that health, i.e. public health, takes priority over every other policy.
Once we have accepted this, not just proclaimed it but believe in it, then we come to the second element, which is the question of political will.
Let me assure you that, if we had had the political will then, we would not be facing this problem now, because we all know what has caused it.
We know all about meat-and-bone meal and we know that there are tests and that we can find the animals from herds which need to be destroyed in order to deal with the problem.
We know all that.
What is preventing us from acting and why must there always be a crisis for us to come here and confirm that we, the European Parliament, believe that public health is the number one priority?
And you are saying the same, but just how well has the Council understood it?
Because, basically, at some point we seem to be unable to act.
We seem to be unable to apply what we know.
And we all know that prevention is the best cure.
Except that there is no cure here.
We know that this epizootic disease brings terrible suffering and tragic consequences in its wake but we do not know where they will lead us.
Because not all its epidemiological elements have been identified.
So we are playing with fire.
And what amazes me is that we come here and repeat the same things over and over again.
I have listened to my fellow members. They are all right in what they say.
Our aim must be to apply it.
We want application, members of the Council, we want action and we want it throughout the European Union; we do not want fragmented action by France or this or that country.
It must be taken everywhere and it must be taken at once.
Madam President, I am totally convinced that the Union in its entirety lacks the political, moral and educational authority to talk about the quality and safety of food.
Nor is it a coincidence that the President-in-Office and the Commissioner refrained from mentioning the main source of all of these problems in the food chain, which is, of course, the common agricultural policy itself.
Parliament has voted half the budget to be spent on encouraging production.
Today' s modern farmers are not what they produce; they are what they are able to produce whilst maintaining quality and safety.
But you are not helping them to achieve this!
I say this because you only help large-scale producers and, as a consequence, you spend a large part of the budget on encouraging these very problems! These problems and those that will follow!
You do not, however, want to accept the principle of doing away with animal feedingstuffs that contain the remains of other animals...
We have already discussed the United Kingdom and Portugal in this Chamber and now we are discussing France.
I am now waiting for the Commissioner to announce the next case, because we will have reached this point within a year with another country and further cases.
The fundamental issue is that the President-in-Office and the Commissioner must accept that a policy guided by post-war principles is no longer possible today and is no longer acceptable.
You must end all aid for production and instead help to bring about quality, food safety and the conservation of resources.
Otherwise, we will not have a food chain that can provide guarantees for consumers.
We will be perpetuating the fraudulent treatment of both farmers and consumers.
Madam President, there is no let up in media interest in the BSE issue.
The same goes for those dreadful pictures of people affected by the Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, despite all the action taken in the Member States, not to mention at EU level.
The debate we are having today on the consequences of the BSE crisis and how we can actually tackle them, is dealing with some very crucial issues.
Firstly, there is the issue of the tests that need to be carried out, and I welcome the fact that we are not going to stipulate a specific age for them.
Secondly, there is the question as to whether it is acceptable to use bonemeal in cattle feed, which has been the subject of lively debate here in this Chamber.
The link between feeding cattle bonemeal - which is, as it happens a very unnatural way to feed animals - and BSE is now clear to everyone.
So action is called for.
In the Netherlands, the legislation governing the use of offal in animal feed is already relatively stringent as matters stand.
There has been a ban on using proteins from mammals and ruminants in animal feed destined for ruminants since as early as 1989.
What is more, this regulation is continually tightened up and complies with requirements made at European level.
The use of fat and blood is also subject to strict rules.
Therefore, I am amazed, under these circumstances, that it is still permissible for corpses to be used or processed.
Although there is no evidence of an absolute risk, I welcome the Dutch proposal to place a complete ban on the use of meat in animal feeds with effect from 1 July 2001.
We cannot afford, in the light of past events, to allow this offal to enter the food chain, no matter what.
Together with my fellow honourable Members, I advocate that we do not wait until July 2001, but enforce this ban now, with almost immediate effect.
There is clearly a need for stringent European measures.
So not just national measures, because the functioning of the internal market will be seriously disrupted if we constantly leave it to the national governments to decide to what extent the use of offal in animal feed should be banned.
Therefore, for the sake of the internal market, and in order to boost consumer confidence, I would advocate a complete and immediate ban.
I would also ask the Commissioner to initiate something of a uniform European approach to the issue of animal corpses and the collection thereof.
There are increasing incidences, also in my own country, of dead sheep or calves simply being left behind because it costs too much to have them collected.
Therefore I would ask the Commission to work towards a degree of harmonisation on this score too.
If it is not going to do so now, then could it at least put this in writing before long, so that we know where we stand.
Madam President, I speak today both as an MEP and a beef farmer from the United Kingdom.
The farming industry in Britain has suffered greatly from the BSE crisis, both financially and in terms of consumer confidence.
However, we have learnt a great deal over the years as to how to put our house in order.
We now have a belt-and-braces system for the safety of our beef.
Recently, the Phillips inquiry into BSE has been published in the UK.
I am pleased that you, Commissioner Byrne, have read that report.
I hope that you will act on it.
The French Government should also read this report because they are in danger of making exactly the same mistakes as were made in the UK at the time of our BSE crisis.
But we now have the benefit of hindsight.
I suggest that the French Government should learn from us.
I have never been convinced by the argument put forward by France that the whole-herd slaughter policy was the right way to tackle outbreaks of BSE in their country.
The recent problem in Normandy of an infected animal being presented as a healthy animal highlights the resistance there is in the farming community to having their entire herds slaughtered.
Furthermore, the recent tests that have been carried out in France of fallen stock have shown several hidden cases of BSE.
I have long been suspicious that in order to avoid having their whole herds slaughtered animals have been secretly shot and buried on farms in France.
The British system of removing infected animals from the herds and paying good compensation for those animals encourages farmers to declare their cases of BSE.
I call upon the European Commission to carry out a total review of the systems that are in place in France to deal with cases of BSE.
In Britain we have also learnt that it is very difficult to stop meat-and-bone meal, that is produced and incorporated in the feedingstuffs for pigs and poultry, also - either by accident or by intention - landing up in feed for cattle and ruminants.
It is very difficult for a feed mill to guarantee that its production lines are completely cleared of meat-and-bone meal before they start manufacturing feedingstuffs for pigs and poultry.
I have long been of the opinion that a complete ban on the use of meat-and-bone meal in animal feeds should be in place throughout Europe.
France has recently introduced a ban on beef on the bone and many French provinces have stopped school children from consuming home-grown beef.
One of the main reasons for this action is that the French Food Agency takes the precautionary principle very seriously.
I would suggest that the European Commission also use the precautionary principle in regard to beef from France.
Until such time as the French Government can guarantee the absolute safety of their beef the Commission should ban all exports from France to the rest of the Community, especially from beef animals that are over 30 months of age.
There is, at the moment, £2 million worth of French beef for the meat processing industry consumed in the UK.
This is totally unacceptable considering the problems regarding BSE in France.
Over a year ago, 16 of Europe's best scientists, including a French chairman, declared British beef safe for consumption throughout Europe, and yet France has illegally maintained a ban on the importation of British beef.
It is total hypocrisy for France to maintain its ban on British beef.
The United Kingdom has suffered with this terrible plague.
I would like to say, on behalf of the farming community, that they are the people at whom the finger is often pointed, but they are not to blame.
Commissioner Byrne was very strong today in his opening statement when he said to the House that he was prepared to look at this matter of meat-and-bone meal and take it on.
I would like to say to him today as he has listened to this debate: does he not realise that this is something that must be taken on immediately?
As the previous speaker has just said, the only way to deal with banning meat-and-bone meal is to have an entire ban otherwise it cannot be policed.
As a result, the poison goes into the system and, as it does, it destroys the system.
I make a special appeal to the Commissioner today to take note of what has been said, practically across the board in this debate, and move quickly and speedily to impose a ban on all meat-and-bone meal in the European Community.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, Commissioner, I have listened with great interest to everything that has been said.
The main thing now is not to be accusing people of delaying implementing regulations or establishing responsibilities, but rather, to have a common imperative, that of ensuring food safety.
It is a legitimate demand on the part of all European consumers.
It is imperative upon government authorities, be they national or European.
I believe that we must now try, following your debates, to define the key ways, in terms of both method and means, in order to ensure compliance with this imperative.
The Presidency believes that this method is based on scientific research and consultation.
As there is still a lot of uncertainty, we must know what the scientific facts are and what action must be taken.
We must also study the feasibility of these measures, and that involves processing MBMs and setting up tests.
The speedy implementation of these means comes next, and finally monitoring.
You have dealt with all these problems in turn.
As regards the last item, monitoring, I would like to thank the Commissioner for his comments, which demonstrated the Commission' s open-mindedness and showed that it was possible to study all these problems and to set up the European Food Agency quickly.
Monitoring can never be anything more than monitoring, however, and if there is still even the slightest possibility that there may have been fraud or embezzlement, or errors of use, this doubt, however tiny it may be, sticks in people' s minds and sometimes brings the entire sector into disrepute.
As far as carrying out generalised testing is concerned, I believe, certainly, that we must increase the number of tests, as indeed you have all called for.
Some countries have already gone down this road.
We hope that the number of tests carried out on the targeted cattle and sheep populations will increase.
I cannot currently see, however, how it will be possible, given the resources available to each of the Member States, to carry out 28 million tests a year, in either technical or financial terms with any degree of effectiveness.
What is more, these tests, however good they are, will still leave a margin of doubt since even the best tests, and these have been highlighted, only make it possible to detect the presence of the disease in the last months of incubation, just before it turns into the full-blown disease, and not right at the start.
So there are doubts, there are uncertainties, but I believe that our joint text and your debates here in this House have enabled us to make progress.
To this end I listened most attentively to all your speeches, and it seems to me appropriate and crucial that the debate on the safety of our citizens is settled at the European level.
It is indeed difficult to have national legislations and a European legislation existing side by side.
I believe we should have a single, comprehensive set of laws, which can be applied to meet this demand and thereby avoid distortions of competition, thus making it possible for the single market to operate smoothly.
Rest assured that, when it comes to continuing the work in the Council and my exchanges with the Commission, I will bear all this in mind, in the full knowledge that reaching agreement within the institutions is one of the best ways of dealing with a problem as complex and universal as that of food safety.
On 30 November, during the Council meeting, the French Presidency will launch an important debate with a view to providing the first responses to a situation of widespread suspicion, which calls into question the credibility of our institutions in the eyes of our citizens.
We are talking about public health, and hence of serious events, which must be treated as such, in a strict and, of course, transparent manner.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, Commissioner, rest assured that, in the twofold undertaking which has fallen to us (in which, I will see to it, the Council will play its part to the full), I am determined to restore consumer confidence and to strengthen the credibility of the European institutions.
Each of you here has sought to question or to refer to the survival of the common agricultural policy.
Some of you have spoken of the inordinate emphasis placed on productivity and the possibility of going back on the Blair House Agreements, which can only take place in the context of the new round of COM talks.
I have listened to all these proposals - I am not insensitive to them.
I shall wait for the results of your debates and I am convinced that we will be able to tackle this safety imperative together, and that we will be able together to find ways and means to guarantee the safety of our fellow citizens.
. Madam President, as I look around this Chamber I see many faces of people whom, I am happy to say, I have got to know very well over the last twelve months.
One thing I can say with conviction is that I am aware that all these people before me are experts on the question of food safety.
Many of you have been involved in this issue for quite a number of years, particularly in the formidable committee that sat a number of years ago on this question.
Indeed you have been involved in this issue longer than I have. I know the commitment that all of you have to it.
Therefore, this debate has been of considerable interest and value to me as a Member of the Commission with responsibility for public health and consumer protection, and special responsibility for food safety.
I am struck by one thing that is particularly important in this context, that is, that the spectrum of debate, particularly on the issue of whether there should be a total ban on meat-and-bone meal goes all the way from "do it" to "don't do it" - in a Chamber filled with experts on food safety.
That is one of the issues that we have to address.
What we must bear in mind when considering this issue is the fact that there is already in existence a ban on the provision of meat-and-bone meal to cattle.
That ban is in place. That is the law and that is what should be complied with.
In addition, there is legislation in place setting out how the meat-and-bone meal, how this feed, is to be processed - another safeguard that is introduced into the system to protect public health and food safety.
By saying that you must ban meat-and-bone meal from feed for pigs and poultry that cannot contract BSE by this vector, what you are saying is not that you are protecting pigs and poultry, but that you are protecting cattle.
You are therefore saying that the legislation that is in place is in some way inadequate or not being complied with.
If there is a belief that there is a widespread disregard for the law on this issue, what does that say about what has been happening over the last few months and years in relation to feed for cattle?
It raises the question that I am afraid to even ask.
Ask yourselves what is the answer to that question.
I believe that there has been compliance with the legislation and if I believe that - and I do not think I am being naïve - I do not believe that it is essential to have a widespread ban on meat-and-bone meal to be fed to pigs and poultry.
But I am willing to listen to the evidence on this issue.
If people from Member States come and tell me that the legislation has not been properly or fully implemented then maybe we will have to think again, but it will not be because the scientists tell us it is necessary, but because there is a failure to comply with the law in the European Union.
That is an issue we must seriously reflect on.
Let me move on to the question of testing.
Mr Whitehead asked me for more details in relation to this and I think he is correct in that I should have stressed this a bit more in what I had to say.
There are two kinds of testing involved here.
Firstly there is the one already in place, legislation having been brought before Parliament some time ago by the Commission for random post-mortem testing throughout the Member States amounting to 170 000 tests.
The purpose of those tests was to identify the level of infectivity in the European Union. It was to get information.
I welcome the fact that France moved quickly and, before any other Member State, started doing this work at a higher level than was set out in the legislation.
Now it is getting this information. Therefore it is faced with the current situation.
It has been fully transparent in the provision of information relating to these tests.
That is also to be welcomed and applauded.
Let us reflect on another issue here which causes me some concern.
If there is a widespread adverse reaction against the authorities in France for doing the right thing, I hope it does not instil timidity in other Member States when they do exactly the same.
If they conduct the tests in a similar way to France, ensuring that they focus on animals that are most at risk, and carry out the number of tests that are required, we will get exactly the kind of information that France has and that will be available right throughout the European Union so we can make the required decisions and move on.
The tests that I am referring to now are somewhat different.
They are not intended to give us information relating to the level of infectivity.
They are more focused on the question of trying to keep out of the food chain carcasses that may be infected.
It has been said that this will be very expensive, will involve a large number of carcasses and so on.
Let us focus on facts.
The three tests available - French, Swiss and Irish - are unable to detect BSE in animals under a certain age.
The result will be negative.
You will go to the expense and trouble of carrying out those tests and you will get negative findings.
Therefore, what is the value of carrying out those tests on young animals?
None in my opinion.
But we also have the weight of scientific evidence that animals under a certain age do not manifest symptoms of BSE.
Therefore, I have asked the Standing Veterinary Committee, sitting today as we speak, to examine this issue to determine at what age these tests should be carried out.
What I am talking about is carrying out these tests on carcasses of animals over a certain age to detect whether infectivity exists and, if it does, eliminate the animal from the food chain.
We have a situation of younger animals where there is no BSE, we are told by the scientists, and the older animals above that certain age, all of them having been tested to determine whether there is BSE or not, and they are eliminated from the food chain.
This is a consumer protection measure and also a measure to enhance consumer confidence.
That is why I have suggested that we take this route and I am looking forward to the advice we get from the SVC this afternoon which I intend to bring before the Council of Ministers next week to discuss this particular issue in relation to the question of the age at which the demarcation should take place.
I believe that is the right way forward.
There are a number of disputes on this and, as I see in this Chamber, there are different views in relation to it, but it is important that we row together on this.
It is important that we try and achieve a consensus as to the right way forward and find proportionate responses and not make accusations to others who, when they identify a proportionate response, say that you are not doing enough to protect consumer public health and consumer protection.
It is legitimate to draw lines in circumstances where you are fairly sure of the line you are drawing in the sand - safe on one side and not on the other.
We must make sure we are fair to one another in identifying these measures which all of us believe to be necessary, because the aim of this exercise is the protection of public health and food safety and the enhancement of consumer confidence.
Finally, I listened with great interest to my friend, Mr Patriat's, comments both earlier and just now and I look forward to working closely with him in relation to these issues over the next number of weeks.
I should tell you that he and I have had a discussion on this very issue as recently as last week in Paris, so I am confident that Parliament, the Council and the Commissioner can work together in a non-acrimonious manner to produce answers to this serious difficulty that we are faced with.
Madam President, I would like to make a very brief personal statement, since our fellow Member, Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf, has attacked the members of my group for not taking part in the committee of enquiry into BSE.
I would just like to make the following clarification. There have been two committees of enquiry within this Parliament.
Mr Martinez took part in the first one, and right here I have, if my fellow Member would care to consult it, his minority opinion, which was expressed in writing at the time of the Böge committee.
We did not take part in the second committee of enquiry quite simply because we were excluded by the operation of the d'Hondt law and by the Rules of Procedure, or lack of them, in this Parliament.
Not inviting us to participate is the best way to avoid having to listen to us.
In any event, Mr Martinez gave his formal warning in 1990, a full 6 years before the first committee of enquiry.
I have received seven motions for resolutions, tabled pursuant to Rule 37(2) of the Rules of Procedure.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon.
Question Time (Commission)
Question No 17 by (H-0848/00):
Subject: Minimum standards governing the expulsion of immigrants The Council meeting of 18 December 1997 adopted a resolution laying down the priorities for cooperation in the field of justice and home affairs for the period from 1 January 1998 to the date of entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam, which clearly set out the objective of 'improving cooperation regarding the expulsion of... immigrants' .
The recent spate of instances in which various Member States have failed to respect the most basic human rights when expelling immigrants is such as to warrant special attention for this issue from the Commission.
These instances include the 'pillow technique' which led to the death of a female immigrant in Belgium, the use of strong sedatives in Spain, the transporting of immigrants in cramped conditions in the holds of ships in Italy and Spain, the tragic case of the 58 Chinese immigrants found dead at the UK port of Dover after they had been detained on a number of occasions on European soil, and the widespread use of various forms of coercion and intimidation against expelled immigrants.
Does the Commission plan to make a proposal of any kind with regard to asylum and immigration policy, with a view both to averting such terrible incidents and to harmonising and coordinating expulsion policies in the Member States which respect human rights and United Nations conventions on this matter?
Mr President, in my contribution to a secular miracle, I wish to say that, with regard to the harmonisation of asylum policy, the main measures that the Union will be adopting are defined not only in the Vienna action plan and in the conclusions of the Tampere European Council, but are also part of the scoreboard that the Commission presented to the Council and to the European Parliament, and will develop in two basic stages.
The first stage - which I hope can be fully concluded by next June - involves laying down common minimum standards for the basic defining elements of an asylum policy.
In the later, more long-term stage, the objective will be to define a fully comprehensive common asylum system.
With a view to defining this overall asylum system, at the end of this year the Commission will present a communication to promote debate on the matter.
With regard specifically to the issue of its legal basis, Article 63(3)(b) of the Treaty establishing the European Community provides for the adoption of measures on illegal immigration and on illegal residence in the Union' s countries, including measures on the repatriation of illegal residents.
A first initiative by the French Presidency is currently being discussed by the Council, the aim of which is to adopt a directive on the mutual recognition of judgments expelling citizens from third countries.
Parliament is also to be consulted on this draft directive.
Public opinion in the Member States views existing repatriation policies as poorly coordinated and largely ineffectual.
The Commission considers that readmission agreements have an important role to play in clarifying and coordinating these policies, and the first Community readmission agreements are currently being negotiated with Russia, Sri Lanka, Pakistan and Morocco.
The Commission hopes that, under the 2001 budget, a financial cooperation instrument will be adopted with the countries of origin and of transit, enhancing their powers in the field of readmission and of voluntary return.
With regard to future policy, it is the Commission' s view that in view of the need for an overall and coherent strategy in the field of repatriation, we must aim above all to prioritise voluntary repatriation.
Bearing this voluntary repatriation in mind, I would remind the House that the European Fund for Refugees provides for specific financial measures to support the development of Member States' policies on repatriation, and that, with regard to the way this repatriation is carried out, I share the concerns expressed by Mrs Cerdeira Morterero about the need for us to adopt common minimum standards establishing dignified and humane procedures and conditions for repatriation.
I am convinced that this will be a worthy topic for the Commission' s work programme for 2001.
Mr President, I too will try to help in this miracle "timesharing" between the panel of Commissioners and MEPs.
Mr Vitorino, you know perfectly well that we share your concerns, the work that you personally have explained to the Committee on Freedoms, the scoreboard and the priorities that the Commission has set for all these issues.
We are working on it in this Committee.
Clearly, circumstances such as those I mention in the question I have put to you must give any European citizen, and especially those for whom we are responsible, an acquired political obligation.
We are working doggedly on these issues, and asking for the greatest effort to speed up the work, so that none of the situations I have mentioned, like the expulsion of immigrants, can ever happen again, because this makes us ashamed to be Europeans and even more so to be those politically responsible.
Mr President, I wish to state that I share Mrs Cerdeira Morterero' s concerns and that I hope she is not only addressing her appeal to the Commission, but also to the Council, so that we may have the entire legal framework adopted by next June.
That is my commitment, for which I accept responsibility.
Mr President, I only want to say two things.
The list of examples given in the question is the result of selective memory, which I feel is hardly appropriate in these cases.
But in short, Commissioner, as of today we do not have an updated scoreboard, nor do we have a legal instrument to regulate the conditions and material assumptions of expulsion.
On 12 December in Palermo, the United Nations is going to sign the World Convention on Organised Crime with a protocol on the traffic in human beings.
There is a direct relationship between organised crime and immigration.
What proposals does the Commission have concerning this matter on the basis of Article 31 of the Union?
I apologise again for the excess of zeal shown in cooperation over the secular miracle: I should also like to say to the honourable Member that I hope that by the end of this year the Commission will be able to present to the Council and the European Parliament two framework decisions under the third pillar, including common definitions, criminal charges and sanctions for trafficking in human beings for the purposes of sexual or economic exploitation.
This will be the foundation stone of the European penal structure for eliminating trafficking in human beings, which generally goes hand in hand with organised crime.
The solutions that the Commission will be proposing are fully in line with the content of the United Nations Convention, which I hope will be signed in Palermo in the week of 12 to 15 December.
Question No 18 by (H-0860/00):
Subject: UN report on the exploitation of women The UN report paints a very black picture of the situation of women throughout the world, referring to tens of millions of unwanted pregnancies, risky abortions, rapes, cases of abuse, infanticides and crimes of 'honour' .
The report states that each year 60 million girls are reported missing, 5 000 women are murdered for reasons of family honour, and about 4 million are sold to service the sex industry, while those that manage to escape end up working in wretched conditions.
The report makes the significant point that one in three women world-wide has been a victim of abuse, rape or forced sex at least once in her life, while the perpetrators go unpunished.
What measures does the Commission intend to take to put a stop to this intolerable situation of shameful exploitation, abuse and the white slave trade, and to eliminate all discrimination against women?
Second Part
Questions to Mr Solbes
Mr President, obviously the issue of the exploitation of, and violence against, women is one of the biggest social problems of our times.
It also has huge economic repercussions, as a result of the host of illegal economic activities springing up in this sector worldwide.
Violence against women takes many forms: there is violence in the home, a crime which does not speak its name, there is sexual exploitation and there is trafficking in women, i.e. trafficking in human beings.
Allow me to remind you that, following Beijing and again in New York this year, the whole world reiterated that all these issues were human rights issues and should be treated as such, as violations of human rights.
The Commission approved a pan-European policy to combat trafficking in human beings back in 1996, with particular emphasis on the issue of women, who are the worst hit by this scourge.
May I remind you of the DAPHNE and STOP programmes, of last year's campaign on domestic violence, on violence in the home, a problem which has huge dimensions at European level, and of the joint action approved in 1997 on trafficking in human beings and the sexual exploitation of children, the basis on which all Member States are called on to review their legislation, take account of certain forms of conduct and encourage cooperation between the judicial authorities.
The programme presented by the Commission on the question of gender equality for the next five years contains five priorities, one of which concerns violence and human rights and we expect to work with governments, local authorities and non-governmental organisations here in order to put programmes in place in all the Member States over the next five years.
Thank you, Commissioner, for your reply.
What you have said is all well and good, but there is no substance to it.
What I should like to ask is this: do you not think, Commissioner, that the disgraceful phenomena which we condemn and which, as you yourself added, relate to the economic climate prevailing in the countries of the European Union, elsewhere in Europe and throughout the world, are the result of impoverishment caused by the policy of elevating the demand for maximum profits to the highest ideal, come what may?
In Europe, modern slaves for every conceivable purpose come mainly from the countries of the former Soviet Union, where women previously had the social status which they deserved.
Today, with the tragic changes which you - I mean your system - wanted and pursued so enthusiastically, the women and children exported to our countries account for most of the exports from these countries...
(The President cut the speaker off)
Mr President, just one word: it is not true that women are only trafficked from the countries of the former Soviet Union or that most of them come from there.
Unfortunately, Asia wears that crown, together with the countries of Africa.
Poverty, wherever it exists, is the main reason, the main factor which causes this phenomenon.
I apologise to Ms Schreyer and Mr Fischler but it is impossible for them to answer the questions.
Questions Nos 19, 20 and 21 will be replied to in writing.
Question No 22 by (H-0809/00):
Subject: Monetary policy and the role of the Commission During a debate in the European Parliament' s Committee on Constitutional Affairs, former Commission President Jacques Delors said that the Commission ought to be responsible for public announcements concerning European policy on the state of the single currency and fluctuations in the exchange rate.
Does the Commission intend to take any steps at least to put an end to the current diversity of opinion which is so prejudicial to the euro?
Questions to Mrs Wallström
Mr President, I would say to Mr Nogueira that clearly, in the model that we have defined, monetary policy is the responsibility of the Central Bank and it is the European Central Bank that takes action in line with the criteria established in the Treaty.
A problem of greater consequence is how to make a single monetary policy compatible with economic policies that are national in accordance with the Treaty.
This operation consists of everything included under economic policy coordination, which has two basic aims: first, that the economic policies of the various Member States should not be incongruent with each other, and secondly, that they should not be incongruent with monetary policy either, generating a situation that could result in an over-restrictive monetary policy.
We mean to carry out this coordination basically through the instrument of major economic policy guidelines, which are applicable in each Member State that approves them and which include not only the major lines of economic policy but also specific recommendations for each Member State.
As a result of the stability and growth plan, however, we have also launched the so-called stability programmes.
Here we take a much more precise, more specific approach, since we are introducing just the public finance element.
The aim during this period has been to reduce government deficit in order to achieve a more flexible monetary policy, lower interest rates and greater growth.
The stated objectives are being satisfactorily achieved.
We hope next year we will achieve a zero deficit situation.
In these circumstances, as the body basically responsible for economic policy coordination, we in Eurogroup are planning to take our fiscal obligations further and, above all, improve the quality and sustainability of public finances, which will certainly mean an improvement in the Stability and Growth Pact and the tackling of more exacting topics with greater content.
Mr President, Commissioner, you have given me an answer about European economic policy and the practice in the Member States and the Commission on this.
With the current state of the euro I believe the problem is not one of economic policy, and other answers need to be given.
If I could make your answer more comprehensive, I would add the evidence that dollars are being systematically purchased from Europe, an extraordinary investment in the United States, and if I governed this country I would be extremely concerned.
In any case, the fall in the euro is favouring European exports enormously, which is not detrimental to Europe.
But I do not think you know how to explain this or you dare not do so, and anyway, the fundamental problem with the fall in the euro in fact lies in the lack of confidence in a common policy, because the Member States resist accepting the strategic and political reality of the euro' s actual existence.
There is no question here either, Mr Solbes.
You can see that all MEPs almost without exception are born to be Commissioners, as they want to expound on the issues.
We all know there is no time.
Ladies and gentlemen, please begin with the question and not with the explanation.
Mr President, from a public relations point of view, I believe it is very important to distinguish between internal and external effects, and I would be interested to know if the Commission intends now, with the physical introduction of the euro not far off, to launch a campaign to explain the difference between the internal and external effects of currency stability to the public?
Mr President, I shall try to answer both points quickly.
First of all, it is a fact that we have an internal euro effect and an external euro effect.
In overall terms, the euro effect must be seen as a total, absolute success: we have managed to improve growth, improve the conditions for stability in our economy, we have managed to keep inflation down to a relatively low level despite the risks we are facing, and we are achieving the basic objective, which is to keep inflation under control.
From an external viewpoint, it is true there is a problem - and indirectly I am answering Mr Nogueira - which is, we must not forget, that savings in Europe are much greater than in the United States.
Part of these European savings are allowing European firms to go abroad and become international; in some cases they are European investments produced abroad, and in others still they are just countries or issuers that act in Europe, where they can raise funds better and then transfer them abroad.
But to answer your actual question, what are we going to do?
In 1999, we set in motion a number of specific programmes in cooperation with Parliament to publicise the euro as thoroughly as possible.
I always say that the euro will not be introduced on 1 January 2002: the euro is already in our pockets; we have it in coins of different guises, but we already have it in our pockets.
Now that particular point needs working on.
Whereas in 2000 we have devoted more attention to small- and medium-sized enterprises, 2001 must be the year of the people.
We are doing this in cooperation with the Member States, which are responsible for the specific euro changeover programmes.
Parliament is taking part (remember the meetings held on 23 and 24 October), and for our part what we are doing to help the Member States make progress and achieve this visibility that we all want is to inform Ecofin every month.
You too are receiving this information on the current situation of each plan for changing over to the physical euro in each of the Member States, so that everybody can choose the best practices in one country or another and we can all make as much progress as we can together and achieve the best possible results before the end of next year.
Question No 23 will be replied to in writing.
Question No 24 by (H-0787/00):
Subject: Atmospheric pollution in Greece According to estimates by Greenpeace, which has followed the WHO methodology, and according to the latest data (1997-1999) on atmospheric pollution as measured by the relevant state organisations, the cost in human lives in Greece is comparable with the number of road deaths (1342 and 7247 additional deaths annually, due to short and long-term consequences, respectively), while the social cost is put at Drs. 548 bn. and Drs. 2096 bn. for short-term and long-term consequences, respectively.
Athens in particular suffers from high concentrations of particulates, ozone, carbon monoxide and nitrogen dioxide and sulphur dioxide.
Will the Commission say whether Greece has notified it of the measures it has taken to transpose Directives 96/61/EC and 96/62/EC in national legislation, whether Greece is correctly implementing the above directives and, more generally, how it views the quality of the air in Greece, especially in the light of all the studies which it itself has commissioned to address the problem?
Questions to Mr Monti
. First of all, Directive 96/61 on integrated pollution prevention and control. which was to be transposed in the Member States by 30 October 1999, has not yet been implemented in Greece.
The Commission has therefore sent a recent opinion to the Greek authorities.
Without action being taken from the Greek side we will pursue the procedure already underway.
In relation to Directive 96/62 on ambient air quality assessment and management, the Commission has brought a case against Greece for non-transposition before the Court of Justice.
During the procedure the Greek authorities made known that the directive had now been transposed.
The Commission then applied to the Court of Justice to withdraw the case initiated against the Greek authorities.
A study on air quality in Athens, performed under a programme between the Commission services and the municipality of Athens has resulted in the installation of a monitoring network to comply with the requirements of daughter legislation under Directive 96/62.
The study also assessed present-day air quality in Athens.
During the measurement campaign elevated levels of sulphur dioxide were observed in some hot-spots.
Existing limit values for nitrogen dioxide and lead were not exceeded.
The ozone thresholds pursuant to Directive 92/72 were not exceeded in the city of Athens, but it should be noted that no measurements were made in mid-summer.
Other monitoring data show ozone thresholds frequently being exceeded outside the Athens agglomeration.
I am hopeful that this situation will improve with the implementation of other Community initiatives such as the recent agreement on the Commission's proposal for a directive on national emission ceilings.
In addition, daughter Directive 99/30 must be transposed in Member States by 19 July 2001.
It sets future limit values for sulphur dioxide, nitrogen dioxide, oxides of nitrogen, particulate matter and lead.
According to the study, current concentrations of nitrogen dioxide are higher than the limit value for nitrogen dioxide to be met by 2010 and the new limit value for particulate matter to be met by 2005 is, at present, widely exceeded.
The recently adopted limit value for benzene is also exceeded.
This situation is expected to improve with the implementation of Community legislation, for example, in the transport sector.
However, the Greek authorities will have to take supplementary measures at local level to ensure that the new air quality standards are respected.
I am most grateful to the Commissioner for such accurate and detailed information.
Mr President, just to set a precedent, I shall not take up a position.
I just have two questions to put to the Commissioner: you said that at times we exceed the limit values.
Have you been notified of any measures taken since the limit values were exceeded?
Secondly, the budget of the Cohesion Fund and the budget for the third Community Support Framework include investments; have you discussed investments to set up the measuring networks provided for in Community legislation throughout Greece and not just in Athens?
If values are exceeded, the Member State, in this case Greece, will have to take action.
What we do is to guarantee that there is a system of monitoring and measuring.
If values are exceeded we ask the Member State to take action and we follow developments.
There is the possibility of using Community funding for establishing networks and for measurements in Greece.
It is extremely important to keep an eye on the development of air quality in Greece, and not just in Athens.
Questions Nos 25 to 28 will be replied to in writing.
Question No 29 by (H-0811/00):
Subject: Government aid to the audiovisual sector During a seminar on the arts sector organised by the French Presidency, a representative of the Commission's Directorate-General for Competition expressed the view that the legal requirements to invest imposed on the networks constituted government aid by virtue of the very fact that such investment was made compulsory by the legislative authority.
Can the Commission confirm whether it does in fact take this approach when considering government aid granted to the film and audiovisual industries?
The resources allocated by the networks under a legal obligation are, in fact, government resources.
The fact that a legal requirement to invest exists for networks does not necessarily imply that the said investment is government aid under Article 87(1) of the EEC Treaty, but rather that the Commission must exercise control pursuant to Article 87 of the EEC Treaty.
The principle by which the Commission determines if such investment is aid and, accordingly, costs such aid is the principle of the private investor operating under normal market economy conditions.
The purchase of audiovisual products for subsequent broadcasting by radio is part of the normal commercial activity of TV networks.
Investments made to finance such products would only constitute government aid if the networks did not obtain equivalent concessions or adequate remuneration. This remuneration can take the form of supplies, purchases of audiovisual products, coproduction shares or broadcasting rights.
It could also consist of other forms of commercial compensation from their investments.
In other words, investments may constitute aid when they finance production projects which are not financed by the networks in the absence of a legal obligation.
Quite clearly, the aid given to these projects would not consist of the entire financing provided by the networks. Rather, it would consist of the difference between the normal yield and the actual yield from the financed production.
Finally, it must be pointed out that the fact that certain of these investments are in the form of aid does not preclude their ultimate compatibility with the rules of the Treaty.
They could be regarded as compatible by virtue of the special support they provide for cultural productions.
Commissioner, could you clarify whether, in this case, there is not a contradiction with the fact that 'television without borders' also helps to produce the content of the works.
As regards the cut-off between the amount of government aid and its territorial use, do you not think that this cut-off ultimately threatens the possibility, and hence the existence, of national aid?
What is the Commission' s opinion on this?
Essentially, my problem is to understand why you work with bilateral notifications and not with an official text which would enable you to consider the problem as a whole, given that you have just raised it with the question of the Treaties.
In its decision to approve the French scheme of supporting film production, the Commission set four specific compatibility criteria.
In the same decision, the Commission undertook to review the aid schemes in all the Member States on the basis of the specific compatibility criteria approved until 2004, the date on which the validity of the authorisation for the French support scheme will expire.
The objective of the Commission' s action is to establish the legal safety and regulatory stability the industry needs in order to develop, which is so far lacking.
The Commission also intends to set the minimum compatibility criteria without, however, wishing to harmonise the aid schemes whose diversity is a reflection of the cultural diversity that the Commission seeks to preserve.
This bilateral approach simply aims to examine the conformity of the different schemes with the prototype which was established at the time the decision was taken to approve the French scheme, based on the four specific compatibility criteria.
Questions Nos 30 to 59 will be replied to in writing .
Today we could use that Vulgar Latin saying, "Ite cuestiones sunt" .
That concludes Questions to the Commission.
(The sitting was suspended at 7.30 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m.)
Combating social exclusion (continuation)
The next item is the continuation of the debate on the report (A5­0307/2000) by Mrs Figueiredo, on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs, on combating social exclusion.
Mr President, Commissioner, the European Union Charter of Fundamental Rights says in its preamble: 'It places the individual at the heart of its activities, by establishing the citizenship of the Union and by creating an area of freedom, security and justice' , and in its first article it adds: 'Human dignity is inviolable.
It must be respected and protected' .
I bring in this quotation from the Charter of Fundamental Rights because some situations described in this magnificent report - I congratulate the rapporteur on it - are probably incompatible with this declaration that has just been willingly adopted by this Parliament.
Compared with these statements, reality is stubborn.
Eurostat data tells us that 18% of the population of the European Union live on less than 60% of average national income or, in other words, 65 million Europeans are living in poverty.
Naturally the national poverty rates are varied and different, as are the types of poverty: urban, in industrial slums, in isolated rural areas, etc., or the poverty linked to sex or age discrimination - I am referring, of course, to poverty among women and child poverty.
Today' s worlds, the society of globalisation and the world economy, the society of information and technological development, may also have a not very positive influence and create, or help to create, new forms of poverty, on account of the intrinsic difficulties in this kind of society in opening up access to employment - to me this is the fundamental route to social integration and inclusion - and because of the need to improve employment and obtain higher-quality jobs.
Europe has created a lot of employment.
In my country, Spain, José María Aznar' s government has made an effort and adopted a commitment: it has succeeded in bringing down a high unemployment rate, and it is still upholding this objective, which is being met, and this commitment.
But I do not think we should be satisfied just with what has been achieved.
To achieve a Europe that encourages integration, in the words of the Lisbon European Council, requires joint effort and joint action.
This comes through knowing the characteristics and the means that can get everyone involved, in society as a whole and in the various governments, on account of the need to quantify objectives and eradicate child poverty, because child poverty must generate other kinds of poverty and perhaps establish formulae of social exclusion that perpetuate poverty and perhaps even destitution.
Therefore, Commissioner, I ask for a special effort to be made to eradicate this child poverty.
Mr President, I would first of all like to thank our rapporteur and welcome the initiative she has taken to engage in dialogue with the Council and the Commission immediately following this first reading in order to work towards ensuring that better consideration is given to the amendments desired by Parliament.
Following the mass unemployment of the 1980s, social exclusion risks becoming the new evil which will gnaw away at Europe over the coming decade.
When growth returns, it will be a challenge we need to take up if we want it to actually benefit everybody.
This is not self-evident as this new growth is very unfair and, as we have seen in the United States for some ten years now, may be accompanied by persistent insecure employment, exclusion, poverty and urban ghettoisation.
Growth will take place under conditions inherited from the crisis: a lot of jobs are being created, but there have never been so many insecure jobs, temporary jobs and imposed part-time work.
I believe that we must ensure that the phenomenon of the working poor does not become widespread over here as well.
For many people, economic exclusion is accompanied by exclusion from decent housing and the lack of access to healthcare, training and culture, with certain groups being more exposed than others.
This Community programme does not aim to take it entirely upon itself to combat exclusion in the European Union, but it must make it possible for Europe to take action in a more determined, effective and coordinated way.
To achieve this, it must be closely linked to the commitment that the Heads of State and Government made in Lisbon in March 2000 to give a decisive boost to eliminating poverty by setting proper objectives which must be approved by the Council by the end of the year, in other words, before the Nice European Council, which will take place in a few weeks' time.
I believe that the programme will not be fully meaningful unless it is linked to achieving this objective.
How can this be done?
Firstly, by improving our understanding of exclusion by establishing an indicator and evaluation criteria directed at target groups in particular.
Secondly, by making it possible to take better account of the experience of operators in the field, NGOs, local authorities, social organisations and of people who are themselves being excluded.
Thirdly, by helping to assess the impact of government policies that are being pursued in the different Member States in order to draw lessons, establish good practices and reflect on good strategies and, in particular, their consistency with other economic and social policies.
Fourthly, by helping to define guidelines and national action plans along the same lines as the Luxembourg procedure on employment, based, therefore, on indicators and objectives which are not minimal but of a high level of requirement corresponding to the idea we have of the European social model.
The amendments proposed by the rapporteur - which we support - aim to reinforce the programme along these lines.
I believe that they converge on a number of points with the proposals made by the high-level social protection group in the Employment Council in the run-up to the Nice Summit. These proposals relate, in particular, to the idea of promoting access to lasting, high-quality employment, to social protection and healthcare.
Added to this is access for all to decent and salubrious housing and to essential services; the high-level group mentioned in this connection electricity, water, heating and also real access to education, justice and public services.
To conclude, I believe that we will only be able to combat exclusion effectively if we guarantee access to fundamental rights to everybody, because dignity and real involvement as a citizen are conditional upon these rights.
Mr President, combating social exclusion is a political desideratum we can all support, but what is to be understood by social exclusion and how is it best to be combated?
What must the EU' s role be?
It is the answers to such questions that we shall find in this programme, designed to promote cooperation on the part of the Member States in combating social exclusion.
The idea is that all interested and concerned parties should be involved in a type of work in which the individual countries describe the extent of social exclusion and their efforts to combat it.
This will form the background against which we shall acquire a more common framework of understanding, for the concept of social exclusion is not so simple to define.
When we think of the long-term unemployed - young as well as old - do we not think of physically or mentally handicapped people, of the mentally ill and of the poor and people with limited means?
No doubt we each of us have our own particular ideas about what the concept should cover.
What we lack is a common definition.
The Commission experimented with a definition in its consultation document for the Lisbon Summit, proceeding on the basis that the excluded are those who have an income of less than 60% of average earnings in the country concerned.
The governments of the Member States did not accept this definition, which is also rather simplistic and unduly bland.
We need a more detailed description of the problem areas.
The very open approach adopted by the Council to the issue is, in my view, quite correct.
There is a need to gather statistics, prepare analyses and, by means of conferences and other devices, create greater common appreciation of what we understand to mean by social exclusion.
With regard to the actual report, Mrs Figueiredo wants to see the word 'poverty' introduced into the legislative text.
This is something to which my group is generally opposed for technical reasons, namely the issue of what the basis would be in terms of the Treaties.
We recognise, of course, that poverty is a source of social exclusion, as is also stated in the text.
I believe we are all agreed about that.
Parts of the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party also have reservations about increasing the appropriation and inserting a reference to the focus group into the legislative text, but we are otherwise able to support Mrs Figueiredo' s report.
Mr President, I wish to congratulate the rapporteur for her great commitment in dealing with this report on a programme of Community action for combating social exclusion in which, as many have said, poverty can be an important factor.
We are told that finding paid work is the best way of preventing social exclusion but I would agree with those who have said that we would have to take account of the fact that gainful employment alone is no guarantee of social participation.
There are many elderly people who would agree with that, as would those who had worked for hours for low wages which do not provide a decent living - farm labourers, for example.
It is a pity that poverty is proving such a controversial addition to the title of this programme, for the reason that it is not mentioned in the Treaties.
It would be interesting to hear from the Council, at some point, whether they are proposing to rectify this omission at the Nice Summit.
Combating poverty proves controversial because it raises the issue of social protection as a productive factor and the issue of redistribution - deeply unfashionable concepts with some Member States.
It would be useful to use some of the increased sum which is requested in this report to fund comparative studies to demonstrate how such developments might be managed.
I am sure that many of the NGOs and local and regional authorities - which Mrs Figueiredo proposes to include in the programme and its evaluation - would be happy to share their considerable expertise.
If we are going to avoid social exclusion we have to ensure that our macroeconomic policies do not act in a way which increases social exclusion.
It would be totally counterproductive to have policies which undermine local economic development, make employment less secure but more demanding and then have to mop up the casualties through programmes which try to combat poverty and social exclusion.
Mr President, we live in a paradoxical society.
In economic policy, we in fact do all we can to increase efficiency, dynamism and response rates.
In the harsh climate which then arises, there are more and more people who cannot keep up and who are marginalised and excluded.
So the more the economy flourishes, the more people seem to be consigned to poverty.
It is easy to become pessimistic.
In spite of the fact that there is money around and in spite of the fact that Europe has never been richer, it appears to be more and more difficult to protect the weak and give the marginalised a proper chance.
That is why Mrs Figueiredo' s report is very important and welcome.
I want to congratulate her warmly on the report.
It is about how the Member States are to be encouraged to do something to combat poverty and social exclusion.
What is particularly good is that she emphasises so strongly that fine words are not enough and that solidarity costs money.
The ideal, of course, is to be able to offer good work to as many people as possible, but in a tough competition-based economy there are many who do not cope.
According to the report, this may be true of women with two jobs who therefore work both outside and inside the home.
It may be true of older people whose knowledge is no longer needed.
It may be true of people with mental difficulties and of large groups of people who do not have a good enough knowledge of the language in order to get jobs.
Above all, it is no doubt true of the many people who work but who have wages too low to live on.
All these groups are threatened by social exclusion if very extensive measures of support are not provided.
The Member States must therefore allocate much more money than at present to social initiatives aimed at combating exclusion, poverty and social destitution.
I mentioned what is paradoxical in society.
According to the current ideology, people must take responsibility for their own lives.
I believe, however, that social exclusion and poverty are caused by social conditions and that responsibility is therefore shared.
In a good society, there must be room for everyone, and that means shared responsibility.
Mr President, in this Chamber we never cease to sing the praises of the European Social Model, the social market economy, which many feel with pride compares very favourably with the primitive model of the United States of America.
However, the figures on poverty in Europe, upon which our report is based and which have been mentioned today - the 18% poverty line - are evidence of a situation which is anything but exciting.
The main problem is still understanding what it is that is not working in the economies and societies of the European countries and which reforms should be carried out in order to reduce substantially the zones of poverty and social exclusion burdening many areas of the Union.
What proposals does the decision under consideration make?
To guarantee rights, to establish coordination, to create committees to study the situation and draw up action plans to combat social exclusion, to promote dialogue between the parties concerned and to create NGO networks at European level, and for this we will appropriate EUR 70 million or maybe EUR 100 million.
Now, I am not questioning the good intentions behind this decision, but I am concerned at the results to be expected from this five-year plan.
At the end of the day, we will in all probability, be more familiar with the statistics of social exclusion and poverty - which is a good thing - and we will have guaranteed operations to assist some tens of thousands of people in Europe - which is also no bad thing - but we will not have made any progress towards structural reforms which could have convincingly reduced poverty and exclusion.
The report stresses two points: unemployment and the extremely low pension levels for certain categories.
It is certainly true that these are two factors which lead to exclusion and poverty, but we must treat the disease rather than the symptoms.
If we want there to be more jobs, we must have the courage to liberalise the labour market.
Where this has been achieved, even in Europe, unemployment has fallen convincingly.
In the United States, a more flexible labour market means that periods of poverty and unemployment are only very short.
If we want to find the resources to give to the pensioners with the most paltry pensions, we must have the courage to admit that we need to stop people retiring at 50 years old and, in all probability, create a completely new social security system.
If we do not reform the labour and welfare markets, re-establishing them on the basis of individual freedom and responsibility rather than on State and trade union paternalism, then I am afraid that our committees and our efforts at coordination will do very little for the poor of the European Union.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, despite the technical problems, I would like to speak.
18% of the European Union's population lives below the poverty line.
These 65 million people are often overlooked.
They do not fit into the image of a prosperous Europe with enormous growth potential.
The cause of this poverty is a lack of jobs, inadequate wages - the phrase "the working poor" comes to mind - and insecure jobs.
If we are to achieve the economic and social cohesion to which we aspire we need not just a high level of employment, but also a high level of social protection.
Mrs Diamantopoulou, I welcome the fact that the Commission ....
(Technical fault)
I am being sabotaged, Mr President!
This should help to recognise the symptoms of exclusion and provide for an exchange of experience based on precise qualitative and quantitative data.
A dialogue is needed between interest groups and the relevant NGOs.
National monitoring centres and regional and local authorities need to be involved.
The benefits of synergy are felt when Member States' measures are linked with Community policies, actions and instruments and with the European Structural Funds.
This can lead to successful practices which act as a model.
Another result is building and extending networks.
And another still is the promotion of innovative projects.
I regard it as essential to set up a reflection group at European level with representatives of the NGOs, the social partners, the Council and the European Parliament taking part in an annual round table.
The concept of open coordination in employment policy since Luxembourg needs to incorporate exclusion and to be reflected in the Member States' National Action Plans.
In 1992, the Council called on the Member States to combat social exclusion.
In 1999, it agreed to promote social integration.
We should reinforce this active role as from 2001, in order to give those afflicted by poverty and social exclusion access to economic, social and cultural activities.
Mr President, I welcome the Commissioner's initiative and this report which seeks to improve upon it.
Europe has managed to avoid the economic crises that have hit many parts of the world over recent years.
Growth is picking up, inflation has been brought down to its lowest levels for a generation, yet we still have persistent poverty and exclusion.
Europe's unemployment rate is still far too high at 8.3%.
Well over half of the 14 million unemployed, according to Eurostat's latest figures, have been out of work for over a year.
Furthermore, according to the EU's statistical service, 18% of European citizens live below the poverty line, while one-third of those living in poverty are working.
In my own country something like 75% of those who are working and living below the poverty line are women.
The situation seems to be getting worse.
Between 1980 and 1995 overall inequality rose in Member States.
Globalisation, technological innovation and the emergence of a knowledge-based economy are coinciding with changing family structures, shifting gender roles and increasingly diverse societies.
The simple fact is that social exclusion is a brake on economic growth, while an inclusive society enhances growth and the well-being of everyone.
The Commission estimates that the under-use of available human resources and the wider cost of ill-health, crime etc. could be between EUR 1 billion and EUR 2 billion annually.
This is an enormous figure.
It is absolutely imperative that Europe address the divisions that already exist and prevents new ones arising.
The existence of a single currency and an increasingly coordinated economic and fiscal policy mean that social policies cannot be the sole responsibilities of national jurisdictions.
It is imperative, however, that Member States engage fully with this programme and consult widely with civil society to establish ambitious targets for eliminating poverty and exclusion.
The first test of the Member States' seriousness will be their approval of Parliament's decision that the funding should be increased from EUR 70 billion to EUR 100 billion.
This in itself is a paltry sum given the extent of the problem.
Finally, I wish to congratulate the rapporteur for a report that identifies the true extent of poverty and social exclusion and questions the notion of a Europe committed to defending social justice and solidarity unless all European institutions and civil society engage seriously with the issues.
Mr President, I am truly grateful to the rapporteur, Mrs Figueiredo, both for the hard work which, in her customary manner, she has lavished on this document, and also because she has accepted some of the amendments I tabled, one of which states that poverty and social exclusion are the result of Member States' laws providing for paltry pensions, as Mr Della Vedova said, referring precisely to the Fatuzzo amendment which has been incorporated into the Figueiredo report.
If only we could do something about social exclusion and poverty!
If only we could reduce the scale!
Every year, my friends Mr Thomas Mann and Mr Mario Mantovani and I go to the Poor Sisters' institute in Brussels to serve meals to the town's poor tramps, and our hearts bleed and we feel guilty that we are only able to do this once a year: we would like to be able to do it every day but, in all honesty, it would be impossible.
Well then, we must endeavour to implement this major undertaking, at least in part.
I am aware of the good intentions of Mrs Figueiredo, the Commission and, in particular, Commissioner Diamantopoulou, but I would stress once again what I said in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs, namely that we must put an end to programmes combating social exclusion.
This must be the last programme: all we need to do is to endeavour to conquer poverty.
Poverty must be eradicated once and for all!
Mr President, I want to begin by thanking the rapporteur for a quite excellent report.
We have all spoken of the extremely beneficial economic development we are seeing, with good growth, declining unemployment and a greater number of jobs.
At the same time, I believe that, in all EU countries, we are seeing increasing and persistent social divisions due to the recession we experienced.
This indicates that labour market policy and traditional employment policy are not enough.
Instead, we must include more policy areas if we are to be able to combat social exclusion and poverty.
It is a multidimensional problem.
Naturally, labour market policy is part and parcel of this issue.
It is important for unemployment to decline and for there to be more jobs.
That is not enough, however, since education policy too must be included, especially in view of the fact that, when knowledge is as important as it is in the new society, everyone must have access to it.
Social security policy is also an important area.
People in different life situations, for example those who are parents of small children or who are unemployed, ill or old, must not inevitably become poor or socially excluded but must be able to participate in society.
Housing policy, too, is an important area.
For example, it is important for people to have the right to housing if they are to be included in society.
Moreover, all political levels must be involved.
We are used to the local level and we are used to the regional and national levels.
We also know however that, in view of the present economic situation with its cross-border economy, it is necessary for us to act at a European level in order to create added value and not in order to take over anything else.
The process involved in this programme is therefore important, just as it is important to combine different policy areas.
This was discussed in Lisbon and will continue to be discussed at the Stockholm meeting. It involves our combining social security policy, labour market policy and education policy with economic policy.
A programme like this, designed to combat social exclusion and poverty, is most excellently suited for this purpose.
Mr President, Eurostat states quite clearly that around 18% of the European Union' s population live on less than 60% of the average national income.
This represents around 75 million European citizens.
In general terms, over the last ten years, the national poverty rate has ranged from 10 to 11% for Denmark and the Netherlands to a very worrying 24% for Portugal.
To this we must add the fact that more than 10 million people depend on assistance from social welfare systems, in a situation which is growing worse in most Member States.
This report is extremely important because it aims to improve the circumstances of the most underprivileged, thereby representing one more step towards strengthening social cohesion.
For this I wish to congratulate the rapporteur.
This is an ambitious programme of Community action which, in line with the Commission' s proposal, will be given budgetary appropriations of EUR 70 million and should remain in force for a period of five years.
This budget should be increased, bearing in mind the processes and the realism that are necessary in this field.
There must be further dialogue with non-governmental organisations and with other social partners, aimed at vigorously detecting the most concentrated areas of poverty and social exclusion and at defining the most efficient and effective ways of combating them.
We must nevertheless issue a warning about the inadequacy of the NGOs' financial control mechanisms, and demand a better system of financial management equal to the task of ensuring that public funds are spent in a sensible and rigorous way.
The beneficiaries of this programme should be the victims of poverty and social exclusion, and we must prevent this from becoming in practice merely a means of financing bodies which investigate the problems of poverty and social exclusion.
Mr President, I congratulate the rapporteur on her excellent contribution to identifying the causes and the scale of poverty, which is an appropriate term for a social reality whose cruelty should not be watered down into a concept as wide-ranging and abstract as social exclusion.
I support the Commission' s initiative to create a programme which meets the objectives of the Treaty' s new social agenda, and which puts the Lisbon decisions into practice.
I also hope that it will welcome the amendments in this report, on which there was a broad consensus.
I urge the Council to establish quantifiable goals, and specific, cross-sector action programmes to combat exclusion, based on indicators which provide considerable information so that closer cooperation can be translated into tangible and effective action, more in the social results that it achieves than in satisfying electoral needs.
I support the need to gain more knowledge about the causes of poverty and I also support preventative action against exclusion resulting from mergers, industrial change, relocations, rural desertification, and urban ghettoisation, with innovative and tangible responses involving both sides of industry, local and national government and concerted action by the public.
Mr President, first of all, I too congratulate Mrs Figueireido on her work, which was approved unanimously, moreover, in committee, and on the innovative nature of her report on the establishment of a Community programme to combat social exclusion.
I therefore support the rapporteur in stressing that the programme, or rather the programme's role, will facilitate greater social cohesion where the poor and the marginalised are concerned.
As is stated in the amendments which I tabled in committee and which were subsequently adopted, I am convinced that an effective, practical fight against poverty must take place according to a timetable of events and targets.
In fact, a programme with in-built deadlines and checks is easier to assess in terms of quantity and quality.
It must be taken into consideration that over 65 million people in the European Union - 7.5 million of which live in my country, Italy - live on a low income, and a low income in Italy, Commissioner, means a family living on an income of EUR 750.
These figures suggest that the budget made available for the programme will be totally insufficient.
I therefore call for it to be increased.
Mr President, I will end by stressing once again that mutual support between States must be the reference point upon which we base a fresh fight against poverty and social exclusion, but we must take into account the fact that the economic progress of the Member States, and therefore an improvement in their welfare due to the implementation of a social economy of scale, will certainly facilitate the achievement of a greater, better system of social justice.
Mr President, I would like to thank and congratulate Mrs Figueiredo and I would like to thank the other Members of Parliament who are not here and who have expressed the opinions of the other committees.
It is a very important and constructive contribution and it supports the Commission proposal for a joint decision of the Council and Parliament which will establish a community action programme to combat social exclusion.
After the Treaty of Amsterdam and some months after the Lisbon council, we all know that a new context has been created for Community action in the area of social policies and social exclusion and social protection.
There is a shift in the political debate at the European level and we can see that there is a strong will to combine social cohesion and competition.
The proposed action programme has a legal basis, Article 137 of the Treaty of Amsterdam, and we had a new mandate after the Lisbon Council.
This programme has been designed to support implementation of the open coordination method which means that it will be possible to improve knowledge, to develop exchange of information and best practice and to evaluate experience to better combat social exclusion.
There has been a very interesting debate on the role of employment in combating social exclusion and the role of the social reforms and of the structural reforms.
There was a discussion about the definition of "poverty" and "social income".
The gap is clearly increasing between rich and poor, but unfortunately it is impossible to participate in these discussions since I am obliged to focus on the proposed programme and on the way in which we will cooperate to implement this programme at the European level.
I would like to inform Members of Parliament that, on 4 December, there will be a discussion in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs on the new social agenda and on what we have achieved during the last year.
There will be a very interesting political debate, and social exclusion will be at the centre of this debate.
As far as the proposed programme is concerned and the report of Parliament, I am particularly happy at your strong overall support for this proposal.
I can accept a majority of your proposals either in their entirety or in spirit.
I agree on your proposal to strengthen the reference to the conclusion of the Lisbon European Council.
I also agree on the importance of improving understanding of social exclusion and poverty and of promoting comparable indicators and assessment criteria.
I also agree to highlight the importance of NGOs as well as of regional and local actors as you suggest, and of better reflecting their experience on the ground.
There is a reference to the use of the word "poverty".
You know there is a political and theoretical discussion on the word "poverty".
Of course, social exclusion is the wider notion and social exclusion has three main dimensions: poverty, discrimination and lack of opportunities.
But I agree that "poverty" is politically a very strong word and I agree that we can add poverty to social exclusion where possible in the text of the proposal.
Unfortunately, we cannot use it in the title of the programme.
This is a legalistic problem because, according to the Treaty's wording, the reference concerns only social exclusion and not poverty.
I also welcome the amendment which stresses the importance of coherence between all relevant policies. I welcome the amendments which refer to the Social Protection Committee.
Something which is very important is that the Commission has accepted an exceptional increase of up to 90% in the rate of Community co-funding of European networks of NGOs active in poverty and social exclusion.
However, I am not able to accept an increase in the budget from EUR 70 million to EUR 100 million.
The budget that we propose is adapted to the aim of the programme and this aim is to encourage cross-national cooperation and mutual learning and not to fund actions on the ground.
Through the Social Fund and through the EQUAL initiative Member States' NGOs can be funded for particular projects for particular actions on the ground.
I am unable to accept the remaining amendments for a variety of reasons: some because they are not in conformity with legal requirements; some because they raise issues which fall outside the scope of the decision establishing the programme; and some because they would confuse the message.
Finally, I would like to come to your proposal that the Commission sets up, in addition to the programme committee, a reflection group.
We cannot accept this proposal because it is against the comitology rules.
But I would like to make the following pragmatic suggestion in response to your concerns because I entirely agree that we must find a way to have close and continuous cooperation.
We have already agreed that the Social Protection Committee would meet on a regular basis with the contact group of Members of Parliament.
The Social Protection Committee plays a key role in the development of policies of the European Council.
Close cooperation between the contact group and the Social Protection Committee will ensure the exchange of views between the Council and Parliament.
On the other hand there could be a link between the contact group and the Commission's officials on a regular basis.
They could exchange views, they could cooperate on a permanent basis, and we have already established a similar liaison between Parliament and the Commission for the Unemployment Fund and for the European Social Fund.
We had very successful and satisfactory results.
Finally, I would like to respond to your concerns about the involvement of different actors and institutions in the implementation of this programme.
I suggest that the annual Round Table we have proposed should be prepared in consultation with representatives of all the institutions which work at European level: the European Parliament, the Committee of the Regions, the Economic and Social Committee, the social partners and the European networks of NGOs.
I believe that these proposals constitute a pragmatic response to your request.
For procedural and institutional reasons it is not possible to incorporate them in the text of the decision.
To sum up, out of the 75 amendments you have proposed, I can accept either as drafted or in spirit 48 of them, namely: Amendments Nos 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 13, 15, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 29, 31, 37, 42, 46, 48, 51, 58, 59, 60, 61, 65, 66, 68 and 74.
I can also accept parts of Amendments Nos 14, 36, 40, 45, 53, 63, 64, 70, 71, 72 and 73.
Finally, I would like to highlight the importance of simplification of the procedures.
You have focused on that during the discussion.
It is true that there is a complexity in the whole procedure but all three institutions wish to reach an agreement as soon as possible.
This is what we will try to do on the part of the Commission. We will try to shorten the procedures as much as we can.
Thank you very much, Commissioner Diamantopoulou.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.
Promotion of electricity from renewable energy sources
The next item is the report (A5­0320/2000) by Mrs Rothe, on behalf of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, on a European Parliament and Council directive on the promotion of electricity from renewable energy sources in the internal electricity market (COM(2000) 279 - C5­0281/2000 - 2000/0116(COD)).
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the report before us, as we have just heard, is about promoting electricity from renewable energy sources in the internal electricity market.
This is therefore the first legislative procedure in the field of renewable energy.
Commissioner, I would like to express my appreciation to you and your colleagues in the Commission for presenting this legislative proposal.
The proposal for a directive is a logical consequence of the European Union's strategy to double the share of renewables in energy consumption by 2010.
As you will see from the committee's report, we agree with the strategy presented in the proposal, which is not to undertake any European harmonisation of support schemes for the time being, but rather to let Member States decide upon support schemes on the basis of nationally set targets and objectives.
However, the fact that we accept this strategy does not necessary mean that we accept all the detail.
I believe that the committee's report proposes important and essential amendments to the proposed directive.
First, however, I would like to make some preliminary comments about promoting renewables.
Many people think that this smacks of subsidies, aids, and financial support for development.
In reality, however, support schemes for electricity generation from solar, wind and biomass, for example, are only necessary because at present we are still directly or indirectly subsidising other energy sources, subsidies, which in the energy sector in the past, chiefly benefited pollutant fossil fuels or hazardous nuclear energy, and which continue to be to paid to them to some extent.
Such subsidies distort competition.
This means that promoting renewables compensates for the external costs of other energy sources, takes into account the positive environmental effects of this type of energy production and, at the same, time makes up for existing distortions in competition.
In the Commission's proposal and draft report, it is proposing indicative targets for the Member States.
Binding individual targets for Member States are only envisaged if the interim reports indicate that compliance with the targets is not meeting the European Union's overall strategy.
But we do not have that much time!
We need binding targets right now.
The European Union and all the Member States entered into commitments at Kyoto because they recognised the dramatic nature of climate change.
In The Hague, the western industrialised nations are currently again being pilloried because they are only implementing those commitments half-heartedly.
There is no doubt that renewables can make a vital contribution to meeting the binding reduction targets for greenhouse gas emissions agreed in Kyoto.
If the commitments entered into were meant seriously, then why not also a commitment to mechanisms which would help to meet those commitments, as I, with the support of the committee, have, after all, built a bridge for the Council and the Member States?
These binding national targets are to be worked out within one year, with the assistance of experts from the Member States.
This makes it possible for Member States to determine the exact level of their respective contributions to meeting the EU's target, in accordance with the principles of burden sharing, and, in this area, also the sharing of opportunities.
A second important amendment we wish to see is this: the Commission envisages various different targets coexisting over five years.
If we define a clear, binding framework for the Member States, then there should be a longer evaluation period for the various support systems required to satisfy these requirements.
A 10-year period would put us in a very good position to judge which system is the most successful and efficient.
We want to convince people in Europe to switch to energy sources which nature renews afresh every day, which do not entail any environmental disruption or climate change, and which make a positive contribution to reducing CO2 emissions.
So there should not really be any controversy about which types of energy production we mean and define as renewable.
We do not therefore seriously want to have to tell the population of our respective regions that domestic waste, which nowadays contains an excessively high proportion of plastic waste, is regarded as a renewable energy source.
Would we perhaps then have to call on the public to produce more and more of this waste, which would certainly enable us to meet the targets we have set ourselves?
It goes without saying that this would discredit us and the European Union's policy.
I am not against waste incineration, indeed I have even called for a separate directive on this in my report.
No, what I am opposed to, as is the committee, is playing with words in a piece of legislation.
As you can see, the draft report refers to separated organic municipal waste, because it belongs there.
As you can also see, untreated wood and cork waste is regarded as a renewable energy source.
Even if only hydroelectric installations with a capacity below 10 MW are to be covered by the support schemes, all hydro will, of course, be regarded as a renewable energy source and will count towards achieving the target.
And one more thing I want to make crystal clear: waste incineration is not a renewable energy source and cannot therefore be counted towards meeting the targets.
Another vital point that the committee agreed on was the problem of connection to the grid and access to the grid for renewables.
There is no argument about the Commission's proposal to guarantee renewables priority access to the grid.
I think that we are unanimous about that.
The Commission's general text on the issue of cost sharing in the report makes matters substantially clearer.
This is necessary because we can only create legal certainty and avoid disputes through clarification.
Those are the main points I wanted to mention today.
I hope that tomorrow this House will take a step forward on the basis of this proposed legislation and our opinion on it, and that you will be able to state, on behalf of the Commission, that you can accept our amendments and that the Council will then be next in line to do its bit!
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Commissioner, the Sixth Conference of the Parties on Climatic Change is meeting at the moment in The Hague.
This is a summit which intends to slow down climate change and at which the Kyoto Protocol will undergo its ordeal by fire.
In addition, the latest conclusions reached by scientists on the intergovernmental panel on climate change alert us to its alarming effects.
Energy from renewable sources will not be a panacea that will solve this problem, but nobody doubts that it can contribute greatly to alleviating it and also to diversifying our sources of energy and reducing our dependence on hydrocarbons, which indeed would not be a bad thing.
I want to point out that the Commission and the Commissioner in particular have hit the mark in proposing this directive to promote renewable sources of electricity.
We trust that the directive will help these as yet incipient forms of energy to develop and become competitive and that the Commission will soon present us with a similar proposal on biofuels.
I also wish to recognise Mrs Rothe' s hard work and congratulate her on it.
Implicit in the report we are to vote on tomorrow is Parliament' s decisive support for this initiative, and I ask the Commissioner to transmit this support to the Members of the Commission because it is in that institution and not here in Parliament that this directive - and others that may follow in the same laudable vein - may find their principal detractor.
I am referring specifically to the proposed guidelines, i.e. aid for the environment.
This document is unacceptable because of the way it proposes to treat operating aid for renewable energy sources and cogeneration, since it does not recognise the different degree of competitiveness between these renewable energy sources and conventional ones.
Neither does it recognise the external costs that are avoided with these types of energy.
In addition, it is inconceivable that the Directorate-General for Competition should move to regulate this kind of aid without taking into account the results of negotiations pertaining to the directive we have before us, and at the very least it can be seen as a snub to Parliament.
Therefore, I wish to say that both documents need to be dealt with in conjunction with one another.
We consider that, if these guidelines are not modified, the environmental impact they will cause will be highly negative.
In the specific case of my country, Spain, these guidelines would be responsible for an additional 225 billion tonnes of CO2 being emitted into the atmosphere between now and 2010 and for our being unable to meet the Kyoto targets.
The directive on renewable sources of energy represents a belief in the future and an investment in the environment.
Investments in the environment are neither cost-free nor do they come into the field of competition.
Mr President, I congratulate Mrs Rothe.
Renewable energy is by far the largest source of energy currently in use in the world.
How else do we see where we are going during the day?
More people use firewood than any other fuel.
But tonight we are talking of extending the use of renewable energy.
I am going to repeat three of our demands.
Clarity is essential as we put forward our point of view to the Council.
We want: binding targets, not indicative cut targets; a rational definition of renewable energy - energy from waste, which is to be incinerated anyway, is a good idea.
But mixed household waste; old paint brushes, polystyrene packaging and discarded plastic toys are not renewable energy.
Another directive is needed for energy from waste, as Mrs Rothe suggests.
Thirdly, we want a reasonable and therefore a longer period of certainty in which renewable energy can continue to receive compensation for the external costs to society which its use avoids.
Let me finish with one very startling fact.
The United Kingdom could generate four times its power requirements from offshore wind alone - four times its power requirements!
Colleagues, this directive makes sense.
Commissioner, thank you for your efforts.
I hope you will support ours.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, the Commission' s proposal to create a framework enabling the proportion of electricity produced from renewable energy sources in the European Union to be considerably increased in the medium term, can only be welcomed.
The lengths the rapporteur, Mrs Rothe, has gone to to make Parliament' s stance on this clear, therefore deserve our full recognition.
After all, on the one hand, this directive is an important element in the series of measures taken to enable us to honour the commitment the EU entered into in Kyoto regarding the reduction of greenhouse gases and, on the other, it is a praiseworthy attempt to reduce the European Union' s dependence on the oil-producing countries.
Under the present circumstances, it must be recognised that the renewable energy sources require some form of financial support, in order to create a level playing field.
As I see it though, these subsidies should be no more than reasonable and only payable for a limited period.
Needless to say, the controversial issue in this report is that to do with the stipulation of binding target figures.
In fact the crux of the report is whether it makes any sense or not to have these binding target figures.
I would advocate a realistic approach, an approach based on the knowledge that electricity production from renewable energy sources can never form a substantial element of total energy production.
Stipulating realistic target figures can only increase public confidence in the energy policy to be pursued.
If the target figures cannot be made binding then we will be creating false expectations, i.e. by pretending to strive for the improvement of the environment without being able to make it a reality.
This would be to the detriment both of the environment and of the policy' s credibility in the eyes of the citizens.
Finally, Mr President, I would like to point out, on the subject of municipal waste processing, that if a switch is made to separated municipal waste collection, a switch can also be made to separated municipal waste processing, and the latter must certainly be regarded as a renewable energy source.
Mr President, Commissioner, Mrs Rothe, what we need is a clear definition of what is renewable.
Plastic is not a renewable resource, nor is peat.
We run the risk of losing the confidence of Europe' s citizens who want to buy green electricity if we sow confusion by coming up with ridiculous definitions.
We need clear national objectives.
I do not agree with Mr Beysen; a liberal should be in favour of the fewest possible distortions in the market.
If we do not have clear objectives, there will be distortion between those countries which do something to promote renewable energies and those countries which do not do enough.
Let us now turn to the support instruments. The Commissioner agrees with Parliament' s position that it is too early to decide, at this stage, between the two instruments currently in place, i.e. firstly the system of green certificates and secondly the system of guaranteed prices.
Since the plea by the Advocate-General before the Court of Luxembourg, there is now less risk of seeing guaranteed prices foiled by state-aid regulations.
But there may still be a threat from seeking compatibility with the internal market.
I believe that a politician is someone who needs to anticipate problems.
I do not want electricians to cause interference between the two systems and to sow confusion and doubt amongst investors in Europe by short-circuiting and manipulating the system of guaranteed prices.
Not only must guaranteed prices be tolerated, they must be protected by the directive.
That is what politics is all about: making competition possible between the two instruments by protecting guaranteed prices and harmonising certificate-related issues.
Renewable energies is a subject which unites the citizens of Europe at a time when Europe is finding it difficult to get its citizens to support greater integration.
I believe that a strong policy on renewable energies is a symbol of the Europe of tomorrow.
Mr President, the dependence of the Member States of the Union on imported energy is massive and is growing all the time.
Reliance on fossil fuels is reliance on imported energy and the political decisions of foreign powers.
Using renewable energy sources will increase the freedom and independence of nations and is in harmony with the principles of ecologically and socially sustainable development.
In preparing the report, a definition of what renewables actually are has been put forward.
Without taking a stand on whether peat is a renewable energy resource, it must be able to be used as a fuel in the production of energy, preferably in the combined production of electricity and heat.
Peat is important in the Nordic countries, and we must have the opportunity there to burn peat, as it is our own source of energy and it reduces the EU' s dependence on imports.
Burning it produces carbon dioxide, but that is produced when fossil fuels are burned anyway.
Those countries that burn oil or gas themselves should not prohibit us from burning peat.
If we do not, we will burn oil or gas.
We are not trying to deceive others into believing that carbon dioxide is reduced by burning peat, but it is our own fuel, while oil and gas are imported goods.
Waste is not a renewable natural resource, although there is more and more of it produced every day.
Landfill site gas can be burned, but the volume of waste should not be increased just so that more gas can be burned than before.
Mr President, the Commission and the rapporteur are right to formulate long-term objectives for promoting electricity production from renewable energy sources, although what we need is a dynamic approach in these matters.
I also think we should give special attention to the effect that the anticipated competition from the candidate countries will have.
They are at an advantage in terms of cost owing to lower labour costs and a lower standard of environmental protection.
That could push energy prices down.
So the logical step to take would be to increase the financing for the support measures for sustainable energy again.
In the meantime, it is absolutely essential, given the variety of energy sources, to establish a sound definition of sustainable energy.
For example, waste incineration must not be called sustainable as a matter of course.
After all, this process also releases harmful substances.
Hence my amendment to maintain the strict emission standards of Annex 5 of the revised directive for waste incineration.
Setting standards on the output side will foster innovation.
Finally, the European countries must demonstrate, via these agreements, that they will contribute to the realisation of the Kyoto objectives.
I support this wholeheartedly because climate change poses a threat to the earth' s flora and fauna.
Furthermore, it is unacceptable for a select group of rich countries to constantly plunder the resources in God' s creation.
Mr President, at the weekend the OPEC ministers met in Vienna and came to the conclusion that there should be no increase in production quotas.
Over the last 18 months we have seen the price of crude oil rise from USD 9.75 to USD 33 a barrel.
As I see it, we are sticking our heads in the sand if we refuse to recognise that we are in the middle of the third oil crisis since the Second World War.
The first oil crisis in 1973 was a political one, as was the second oil crisis in 1979, but this is a lasting crisis, because all the indications are that reserves are by no means as large as we have been led to believe.
This is also what individual studies indicate.
I could even quote Saudi Arabia's former oil minister, Sheikh Yamani, who recently said on Austrian television that the Oil Age is coming to an end, not perhaps because of a shortage of oil, no more than the Stone Age came to an end for lack of stones!
And we cannot replace oil as a primary energy source by other primary energy sources, because they too would then soon be in short supply.
Oil cannot be replaced by coal, natural gas or uranium.
So this directive is unintentionally topical right now.
However, it also provides us with an historical opportunity to give renewable energy sources, which constantly regenerate themselves - that is wind, hydro, solar and biomass - their proper place in future energy supply. This is for a variety of reasons - environmental reasons, social reasons, because they create jobs, for peace policy reasons, because this energy source has sparked off wars throughout the century, and, lastly, because they also represent a great economic opportunity for the industrialised nations.
Mr President, Commissioner, we warmly support the draft directive for electricity from renewable energy sources.
We see it as building on the work of our colleague, Mr Mombaur, in advocating a greater share of electricity and energy in the European Union from these sources.
Clearly, the issues that divide the House are quite stark: the issue of the definition of renewable energy, for instance.
Many of us feel that energy from waste should be included.
It is a valuable resource and it certainly renews itself day-by-day, and that should qualify it to be included.
It seems a pity to exclude any category which can contribute to the overall achievement of energy from waste - whether it is for small-scale projects or part of the overall calculation.
The key issue, however, that divides us is the question of the binding nature of the targets.
We have grave reservations about this being in conflict with the principle of subsidiarity.
We think our friends on the Left and the Greens are asking too much in this regard.
It could scupper this directive, but we also think it is a matter of practicality.
If you aim for these targets, there is a curious range of percentages between 6% and nearly 80% in different Member States.
This seems a very curious way of going about it, so we think the Commission is right to aim for indicative targets.
The third point in issue here is the length of support programmes.
We favour a shorter period followed by a review, and I would say to my colleague, Mrs McNally, that she paints a pretty picture of windmills in the sea, but I must tell her that the engineering difficulties and the costs involved make that technology, as with electricity from the sun, rather a long way off in the future.
But I warmly support this proposal.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to thank Mrs Rothe for an excellent report, which revealed much understanding of the situation, We obviously have to support an increase in the use of electricity produced from renewable energy sources.
The share should aim to be doubled in the next ten years; it could well be more than that.
However, the Union' s dependence on imported energy is growing too fast at present.
In twenty or so years' time it will be as much as 70%.
That will create uncertainty in our lives - in the economy as well as other areas.
I think we not only need to develop renewable energy sources but a modern energy savings programme to run in parallel with that process, as this dependence is also starting to become a matter of security for us.
Peat grows continuously.
The formation of peat by assimilation and the production of organic debris are the same as with other plant biomasses.
Instead of a hundred years, as with wood, peat needs thousands of years to regenerate.
We need peat especially in the eastern and northern parts of my own country, where all other fuels, apart from wood, have to be brought in from far away.
We do not wish to burn and be dependent just on coal and oil.
For us an annual growth limit in peat is quite enough. It is a lot - too much.
We Finns regard the forest and the marshes as almost sacred, and we know how to use them in compliance with the principle of sustainable development.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, the use of sustainable renewable energy sources must be one of the principle objectives of a modern energy policy in Europe as well, but there must also be obligations and certainties, dictated by common sense, of course.
In this sense, hydroelectric power is important, and it has been both a burden and a blessing for the mountain peoples, for they have had to pay a very high price for their land and have watched local industrialisation processes spring up, associated precisely with the presence of this energy source.
Now this resource - renewable energy par excellence - must be fully exploited: without further harm to the environment, of course, and along with the introduction of compensation and repossession mechanisms for the mountain peoples.
This directive does, of course, take the desired line in that here, at last, is genuine exploitation of renewable energies.
Mr President, I would like to thank Mrs Rothe for an excellent report which is very timely this week when we are struggling with the crisis of climate change.
Commissioner, we do have a problem: the provision of grid infrastructure to facilitate network access for renewables.
There is a risk of renewables being stillborn or strangled at birth by the utilities that have a monopoly, if they can charge huge sums for grid access.
One farmer in my locality with a wind project was quoted over EUR 2 million for a connection and this is clearly a problem that I would like addressed.
Also, I would like to inform the Commissioner that Ireland can be competitive in wind energy in a very short time.
We believe that we can be competitive given the correct initial support, and those do include grid access.
I would like to inform Mr Chichester that off my own seashore there are already well advanced windmills in the sea, certainly a project that is going to be up-and-running within a short space of time, so I would like to invite him to come and see it when it does get-up-and-running.
I am confident that he will appreciate it.
Mr President, increasing the proportion of electricity from renewable energy sources is a good move.
The share of renewable energy sources proposed, 22% by 2010, compared with 13.9% now, is particularly ambitious and I am just wondering whether a directive which focuses on the market and makes no provision for parallel measures such as support for research will suffice in order to achieve it.
One very serious question is how to deal with the extra generation costs.
The directive talks about support systems, basically a premium paid to companies which operate in this sector, and relies on so-called market mechanisms for the final solution.
This basically means that workers will be subsidising both the company's costs and its profits and, of course, this would not happen if the energy generation and distribution industry were a nationalised industry, as we in the Communist Party of Greece insist that it should be, and if it had not been sold off to the private sector on the orders of bid business.
We therefore believe that this directive will not achieve its intended purpose.
Mr President, I would like to thank Mrs Rothe for her valuable work in drafting this report.
Promoting the use of electricity from renewable energy sources is a very worthwhile endeavour.
The EU' s reliance on imported energy will, in any case, rise significantly in the next twenty years.
Since, at the same time, the EU has to adhere to the climatic targets set at Kyoto, it is especially important that we invest more and more in research into renewables.
I am satisfied that the new directive takes account of the importance of biomass, peat ands other wood-based raw materials, for example.
The debate on renewable energy sources must not become a form of populism against nuclear energy.
We have to remember that only nuclear power in conjunction with renewable energy sources will enable the Kyoto Protocol obligations regarding climate to be fulfilled.
The controversy over ending the use of nuclear power, for example in Sweden and Germany, has shown that without any visible energy alternatives produced at a competitive price and which are environmentally friendly, the debate is surely lacking something.
The total deregulation of the electricity markets is also one precondition of the increased use of renewables.
The artificial barriers to, and restrictions on, trade upheld by the monopolies must be done away with.
For example, the cheap energy produced in the Nordic countries in hydroelectric plants is still not freely available to the markets of Central Europe, as the situation stands at present.
Mr President, you will all have heard how Don Quixote used to fight windmills.
This fight represents a pointless or impossible struggle against all that we take for granted.
Unfortunately, windmills are no longer things we can take for granted, but one of the things we can is the subsidisation of the fossil fuel sector.
The fight against these subsidies appeared to be a hopeless task.
But this time round, it is a fight for the windmills and that is why it will prove successful.
As social democrats, we feel that sustainable energy must be given a fair crack of the whip.
Sustainable energy can contribute to fair distribution between countries.
Consumers must be given fair choices.
In addition, sustainable energy provides a solid basis for the economy.
In other words, the fight for windmills is one where there are no losers.
We could not have chosen a better moment for this debate.
The climate conference has just started in The Hague.
Our objectives in the field of sustainable energy are ambitious, yet still modest in the context of the climate problems we face.
We need radical technological adaptation.
So what we must not do is start fiddling with the definition of sustainable energy so as to be able to fulfil the objectives with minimum effort.
Sustainable energy is often associated with small-scale solutions: solar panels on everyone' s roof and a windmill in every village.
That would be marvellous, but sustainable energy also demands large-scale investments.
We need commitment from the government if we are to get the funding together.
We need a secure market for sustainable energy, because a non-binding approach will not suffice in this case.
That is why Member States must have binding objectives.
These must be consumption objectives, because sustainable energy may be imported and exported so that each country can use its advantages to optimum effect.
In addition, target figures must be set for the production objectives, because that will give each Member State the incentive to exploit their whole potential.
Mr President, on a final note, I would very much like to thank the rapporteur for her worthwhile contribution to this topic.
Mr President, I too would like to thank the rapporteur for her excellent work in connection with this report.
A really excellent proposal has been produced, thanks to cooperation.
The definition of renewable energy sources approved by the committee is a reasonably successful and all-embracing one. Peat must also be included in it, as many of my colleagues have argued with persuasion here.
Increasing the use of renewable energy can reduce dependence on oil and also create jobs in sparsely populated regions.
In addition, it is an important means of cutting greenhouse gases in the Community.
I think it is good that we are setting our sights high, but it is most important that we can agree common targets with credibility and, furthermore, with commitment, which is what the rapporteur referred to here earlier on.
I think the principle whereby the directive can create a framework for the increased use of renewables in the production of electricity is a good one.
Although it will be left to the Member States to decide on the promotional measures to be used and to implement them, we also need increased input from the Union.
Mr President, let there be no doubt a combination of investments in renewables and energy efficiency is the only realistic way for the European Union to meet the requirements of the Kyoto Protocol and reduce our heavy dependence on fossil fuels.
I congratulate the Commissioner for her initiative, as well as Mrs Rothe for her report.
I only wish that this directive were part of a coherent long-term energy strategy of the Union.
But it is not.
Instead, proposals related to energy are submitted one at a time and without much consistency.
This is not your fault, Commissioner.
It is primarily caused by Member States.
We will not be successful in our efforts to transform our energy system in the Union unless we make energy policy - including taxation - part of a common policy.
The problem we have with different support systems in the Member States, referred to by Mr Chichester, is but one example of the need for a more common approach in this field.
Finally a word on costs.
All new technologies are expensive in the beginning.
But experience tells us from almost every possible field that every time demand increases by 100% costs come down by an estimated 10 to 15%.
Renewable energy is no exception.
I could show you figures and curves here demonstrating that for both wind energy and photovoltaics this mathematical formula applies.
Hence, I am optimistic about the future potential for renewables provided the right incentives are put in place.
I wish you all possible success, Commissioner.
Commissioner, our debate has come at an opportune time - as a number of us have said - as it coincides with the Hague Conference on Climate Change.
Everybody is now well aware that the risk to humanity is not just an issue for future generations.
We are already feeling the negative impact of the greenhouse effect, climatic upheavals, global warming, in short, a whole series of difficulties that are already on our doorstep and call for the adoption of urgent, stringent and firm measures.
The good proposal that you have put forward, Commissioner De Palacio - and I should like to pay tribute to your realism as regards energy - and the excellent report by Mrs Rothe are a step in the right direction by promoting renewable energies.
Looking at this issue we see only interests, whether they be in the field of securing supplies, protecting the environment, combating the greenhouse effect or creating jobs.
Of course, we must agree to finance environmental protection, and that is also where we see the limitations of the market.
Free competition does not solve all the problems and, more especially, it does not settle the fight against the greenhouse effect or against waste.
Member States must now accept the proposals that are being put forward.
We must vote overwhelmingly in favour of the proposals from Mrs Rothe.
I would like to conclude simply by mentioning three problems which have come up time and time again throughout this debate.
The first problem is that of peat, which is an important energy source: in my view, it is not a renewable energy.
The second problem is that of household waste: strictly speaking it is not a renewable energy, but one must guard against sending a negative signal as regards the incineration of household waste.
Finally, as far as the degree of constraint is concerned, I will simply say - because I do not have any more time - that an objective in itself is never constraining: it is an objective and everything must be done to achieve it.
This is what we must do at a European level.
Mr President, I would first like to thank Mrs Rothe for her careful and sensitive work on this subject.
I believe that it takes great courage to keep renewable energy in the spotlight in the way she has managed to do.
I have just come from an OPEC meeting, and the price of USD 30 for crude oil provides us with an opportunity to make totally new investments in this sector.
Particularly in the field of research and development, it is important that, in future, we should pay more attention to renewable energy, and I especially have in mind gas from landfill sites and sewage treatment plants, for which there is a role in this regard.
But I also believe that we should not forget education, because energy efficiency and energy conservation are undeniably important subjects for the future, in just the same way as making use of an efficient infrastructure.
Mr President, first of all I should like to congratulate Mrs Rothe on the excellent job she has done with this report and, what is more, on the spirit of consensus she has demonstrated.
I am convinced that in all energy-related matters we should be aware that either we improve our sources or we shall leave the planet Earth uninhabitable within a few generations.
In my opinion, it is fundamental that we should ensure support for these kinds of energy sources for a considerable period of time, thus allowing our industries to make decisive, long-term investments in this alternative energy.
I believe a stable framework for energy from renewable sources needs to be guaranteed within ten years at least; this is a proposal we should all support.
With regard to our targets in this field, we have to listen to the people and go beyond the Commission' s proposal of 21%, which I think is very positive overall, and increase the renewable portion of the total electricity produced.
Furthermore, for the sake of coherence, the targets I have mentioned when converted into national parameters must be binding or else the directive will lack content and substance.
Indeed it is fundamental that they should be binding to demonstrate that in environmental matters, too, the European Union takes its international obligations seriously.
Lastly, I am aware that all this is easy to criticise and difficult to carry out, but if we do not act immediately, within a few generations we shall be in deep water, and that will lead us to disaster.
So let us act together and leave an inhabitable world for our children.
Mr President, I would firstly like to congratulate Mrs Rothe on the magnificent work she has carried out, as well as all the Members who have spoken and who have, on many occasions, tabled amendments to the text proposed to Parliament and the Council.
This Commission proposal is being presented in circumstances which, while in many ways may be negative for many aspects of our economies and our lives, I believe are positive in terms of this particular initiative.
A dramatic increase in the price of oil without doubt starkly highlights the problems relating to our dependence on energy from fossil fuels.
The strategic objective of the directive is to create a stable framework to enable the significant development, in the medium term, of electricity generated from renewable energy sources within the European Union, green electricity, and to provide access to it for the internal electricity market.
However, it must be done in that order. Firstly, we must increase the production of green electricity and then we must deal with issues relating to the market.
This proposal offers a certain degree of legislative certainty and, at the same time, it respects the principle of subsidiarity, by providing the Member States with the degree of autonomy necessary to take account of their specific circumstances until such time as we can see, according to the way events progress, which is the best way to promote the installation of electricity sources.
I would like to thank Mrs Rothe for her support for these principles and all the speakers who have also shown such support.
As you know, the Commission intends shortly to adopt a Green Paper on the availability of energy supply and compliance with the Kyoto objectives and the commitments made there by the European Union.
We believe that these are two fundamental aspects, of different types but equally important.
The European Union, which flies the flag in the fight against climate change and in the reduction of emissions, must not be the first to fail to comply with its own objectives and its own commitments.
As a second issue, the availability of supply is a key element in guaranteeing economic development, the well-being of our countries and of the Union as a whole.
In this Green Paper, we must talk about the role to be played by the various sources of energy.
Firstly, energy saving.
I would like to stress this - as some speakers have done - but I would also like to say that it is not a question of opposing any particular energy source or waging a war against it in favour of another.
One of the key pillars in relation to compliance with Kyoto and for the future of the Union' s energy is the development and increase of the use of renewable energies.
In today' s document, the Commission intends to make it clear that the introduction of renewable energy sources does not currently enjoy the same facilities that other sources of energy had in their day, for example nuclear energy, coal and even oil, to mention but a few.
Aid for renewable energy sources is justifiable also because conventional energy sources do not pay in any significant way for some of the external costs generated by their use.
Furthermore, renewable energy sources are a factor in the availability of supply, and we therefore have an enormous potential for production within the European Union.
With regard to the amendments that have been tabled, please let me tell you that their number is simply extraordinary and this demonstrates Parliament' s great interest in this issue.
They also show that there are differing opinions on the best way to promote this type of electricity.
Nevertheless, we all agree that in Europe we must speed up and intensify the production of this type of energy and that this requires effort.
In our fight to create a strong and dynamic green electricity market, the first thing we have to do is listen, so that we can learn from each other.
I have noticed that there are two trends of opinion, with opposing approaches, on this issue.
The first stresses the rapid introduction of market forces, while the second underlines the need to establish transitional periods and active public aid.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, in its proposal the Commission is trying to retain the best elements of these two approaches with the aim of producing a balanced text, but I must also make it very clear that a priority objective at the moment is the promotion and development of renewable energy.
Therefore, issues concerning the market are of secondary importance.
They are an objective which must not be forgotten but they are not the priority objective of this initiative, which is fundamentally the development and increased use of renewable energy sources.
Amendments Nos 1, 2, 8, 20 and 21 highlight the need for a policy favourable to green electricity and its many advantages and can be immediately accepted by the Commission.
For the same reason we can accept Amendment No 3, in part, but not Amendment No 7, which is too technical to be included in the text of the proposal.
As for Amendment No 5, I am happy to tell you that, given the importance of this issue, the Commission is studying the possibility of presenting a new directive on biofuels generated from renewable energy sources, specifically from biomass, from agricultural products, which will simplify some of the problems which have been raised.
When we start to talk about the targets for electricity generated from renewable energy sources, we first must agree on what we understand by renewable energy sources.
This is of fundamental importance in order to lay the foundations for the future market and some of you have already mentioned this matter.
This means that we can, to a large extent, follow the definition presented by the European Parliament in its Amendment No 27 but, when we talk about extending the use of biomass - even though, it could perhaps be accepted as it is presented - in no circumstance can it be accepted in relation to domestic waste.
In the majority of cases that is not renewable energy.
Neither can the Commission accept peat, since it is clearly a fossil fuel, although it is generated more quickly, but it is fossil nonetheless.
As I have said, we cannot take advantage of biomass in the case of unpolluted woods and we support Amendment No 24.
The reference to waste, with no other classification, as a source of renewable energy - as I said a moment ago - is inadequate and contrary to the policy of management of solid waste.
The Commission rejects this part of Amendment No 27, Amendments Nos 11, 54, 55, 61 and Amendment No 57, which are all related to it.
The Commission also believes that all electricity generated from renewable energy sources and used in hybrid power plants must be considered as green electricity and not only that to be used as reserve power.
Therefore, we cannot accept Amendment No 28.
The annex to the Commission' s proposal includes the indicative targets with regard to the national level of consumption of green electricity necessary for achieving the total quota of 22.1% for the whole of the European Union by 2010, in accordance with the objectives laid down in the White Paper of 1997.
In this context, I must point out two issues.
Firstly, the importance of the targets being indicative.
Ladies and gentlemen, I would also like to suggest mandatory targets but we have to be realistic and, although I regret this, I cannot, at this time, accept this suggestion that you have made, because it would be automatically rejected by the Member States.
This is the first time in a Union directive that national targets of this type are being considered.
These are not obligations which must be fulfilled but national targets.
Of course, we are giving this possibility our consideration but, in principle, because of the negotiations with the other party, that is, the Council, I cannot accept these amendments although I understand their approach and I have enormous sympathy for them.
Therefore, I repeat that article 3(4) is of key importance.
When the report which must be produced on compliance and the development of renewable energy in the various countries indicates that a certain country is clearly failing to comply with those targets, proposals will be made to Parliament and the Council to correct the situation.
Those would evidently be mandatory targets for that State, so that it complies with them, so that in this way it complies with these targets, which are targets and not obligations.
The task we are taking on by means of this directive must be based on transparent measures, which increase confidence, but this process would probably never take off if we impose binding targets in its text.
Some States do not even wish to accept the indicative targets, so there is no way they would accept targets if they were binding.
With regard to the calculation, our calculation of 22.1%, instead of the 23.5% established in 1997, is a response to issues of credibility.
The figures we are presenting here are not arbitrary or mere whims but are instead a response to the real situation as we find it.
For this reason, we cannot support the amendments which propose legally binding targets - the creation of the committee or the target of 23.5% - and therefore we must reject for the time being Amendments Nos 6, 9, 12, 25, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 50, 51, 52, 67 and 68.
In relation to the support systems, this is the second group of amendments where the Commission considered it premature to propose a harmonised support system, but stated that, if necessary, it will present a proposal of this type in accordance with certain principles.
It considers that many of the amendments proposed by Parliament strengthen the Commission' s pragmatic approach and, at the same time, clarify, improve and complement it.
We therefore support Amendments Nos 36 and 56 and also certain aspects of Amendments Nos 4, 15 and 62, relating to the idea of internalising external costs and compensating for external costs which are not covered in favour of renewable energy sources.
However, ladies and gentlemen, we cannot accept the parts which prejudice the application of rules on state aid.
Neither can we accept the part of Amendment No 37 which demands that the future harmonised support system satisfies the need for the internalisation of external costs, since this could only be done through fiscal harmonisation which exceeds the scope of the future proposal in this respect.
On the other hand, we could accept Amendments Nos 10 and 59, which state that investment aid to large hydroelectric plants would only be possible in the event that they contribute to improving the environment.
Any other situation would prevent me from including large hydroelectric plants within the aid to green electricity.
Large hydroelectric plants, in principle, are broadly viable in themselves and have very high environmental costs.
Amendment No 53 would mean excluding all competitive forms of renewable energy from the subsidies and other advantages and, therefore, the Commission cannot accept its wording.
With regard to the principles on which the future harmonised support system must be based, the Commission can accept the parts of Amendments Nos 37 and 38 which stipulate that such a system must take account of the environmental objectives of the Treaty, the experience acquired with the support systems, which have proven to be effective and positive, as well as geographical conditions.
However, the Commission cannot accept parts of Amendments Nos 37 and 38 and Amendment No 39, insofar as they prejudge the type of system which must be applied or they require that there should be no distortion to the biomass market.
For the same reason, we reject Amendment No 23.
The Commission can accept the need for the current support systems in the transitional systems already considered in article 4(d) of its proposal.
However, while doing so, the Commission is very conscious that the terms used should not prejudice its right of initiative and must not be incompatible with the single market for electricity.
The Commission can accept part of the combined Amendments Nos 17 and 18, insofar as this transitional period of ten years relates to maintaining the confidence of investors and not to the continuation of the support systems as such.
Ladies and gentlemen, there is good reason to feel optimistic.
As some of you have just pointed out, wind energy is very close to becoming competitive, but we have to continue providing genuine support for the development of renewable energy.
Others of you have referred to the fact that this support is going to create more demand, greater technological development and, therefore, greater competitiveness, and that is what we are putting our faith in.
When the time comes, further down the line, we will have to gradually incorporate the market aspects which - as I have said - make up the second phase, since the first phase is to generate a sufficient quantity of renewable energy.
Nevertheless, for reasons that I mentioned earlier, the Commission rejects Amendments Nos 13, 32, 40, 41, 63 and 64.
With regard to the amendments concerning market forces and competition, the Commission can accept the relevant parts of Amendments Nos 17 and 18 and Amendment No 22, which stress the need to create a market in ecological electricity, but rejects Amendment No 19, which demands harmonisation of national support systems.
We must provide a broad definition of a support system and therefore cannot accept Amendments Nos 16 and 19.
With regard to technical measures and the guarantee of origin of ecological electricity, we cannot, unfortunately, support amendments seeking to extend this guarantee to all types of electricity or to electricity from third countries, since that exceeds the scope of the proposal.
We reject Amendments Nos 14, 42, 43 and 44 and Amendment No 58, which seeks to achieve cross-border trading in electricity certificates. That is premature at this stage and cannot be accepted at the moment.
We cannot accept Amendment No 45, which would weaken the proposal by forcing Member States to revise the legal framework and nor can we accept Amendment No 46.
We cannot accept Amendments Nos 26, 47 and 60 or Amendment No 65, which impose binding rules on the distribution of connection costs and other network costs at a European level.
In relation to Amendments Nos 48, 49 and 66, the Commission can accept that, when the time comes, the national targets for green electricity for 2010-2020 should be indicated, but cannot accept those parts of the amendments which could prejudice the application of the rules of competition law in the field of State aid.
Ladies and gentlemen, I am sorry that I have spoken at such length but I believe that the debate warrants this degree of attention.
I would like, once again, to congratulate the rapporteur, Mrs Rothe, and all of you for your work, and reiterate the absolute need for us, once and for all, to give real impetus to the use of renewable energy in the European Union. That is what we intend to do by means of this initiative.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.
Gender-related aspects of armed conflicts
The next item is the report (A5-0308/2000) by Mrs Theorin, on behalf of the Committee on Women's Rights and Equal Opportunities, on participation of women in peaceful conflict resolution (2000/2025(INI)).
Mr President, following the end of the Cold War, the battlefield has shifted to small communities, streets and homes.
Conflicts are more likely to arise within rather than between States.
Wars and other conflicts have always been a male province, but the majority of victims - 90 per cent - are civilian.
It is women and girls who, in addition, are exposed to special forms of atrocity.
They are raped, abducted and kept as sex slaves.
Those widowed by conflicts are forced to bring up children and look after the elderly by themselves.
Women are nonetheless excluded from the peace negotiations, and their needs and priorities are overlooked.
In the Commission for the Reconstruction of Tajikistan, which has 25 000 widows, only one of 26 participants was a woman.
In the initial peace negotiations to bring an end to the conflict in Burundi, two out of 126 delegates were women.
No Bosnian women took part in the peace negotiations which brought the war in Bosnia to an end, and this despite the fact that the whole world was aware of the systematic rape to which women were exposed and of the responsibility they would be forced to accept for reconstructing Bosnian society.
In the negotiations which preceded NATO' s bombing of Kosovo four years later, there was only one woman in the delegation.
When the stability pact for the reconstruction of South-Eastern Europe was created, no women at all were appointed in spite of their unique experience in peacemaking at grass roots level.
They had even less of a role to play in the committee responsible for reconstruction.
A house cannot be built on half a plot of land.
If we exclude 50 per cent of the population, we shall not obtain a sustainable peace.
Women must participate fully in all peace negotiations, in all reconstruction work and in peace-keeping operations.
While formal peace processes are almost exclusively a male domain, international experience and declarations show the importance of women' s participation in resolving conflicts and building peace.
In the few cases in which civil society and women have taken part in formal peace negotiations, it has, however, been successful, for example in South Africa, Guatemala and Cambodia.
This is also apparent from a series of UN documents, most recently the resolution concerning women, peace and security adopted by the Security Council two weeks ago.
It is a question of protecting the civilian population, refugees and asylum seekers, of combating exemption from punishment for rape committed in war and of promoting women' s active participation in resolving conflicts and building peace at all levels. These areas are the subject of my report, which has obtained broad support in committee.
To make it possible for the Group of the European People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats to vote in favour of the resolution, I have gone along with compromise Amendment No 19 up to Paragraph 12, which is backed by both the Group of the Party of European Socialists and the Group of the European People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats.
I propose a supplement to the fourth Geneva protocol whereby rape, forced pregnancy and sexual slavery are to be defined as war crimes in the same way as terrorism and torture.
I urge the Member States to ratify the Treaty of Rome for a permanent international criminal court.
Such a court is absolutely essential if the tendency to systematically use rape as a strategy of war is to be precluded.
In addition, all peacekeeping personnel, men as well as women, ought to undergo equality training.
This applies especially to peacekeeping forces.
The goal should be to have at least 40 per cent women involved in all peace and reconstruction work.
Local participation in the peace and reconciliation processes is important.
I therefore urge the Member States and the Commission to support individual organisations engaged in conflict prevention and peace work at a technical, financial and political level.
Despite the fact that only a limited number of women have been involved, studies show that women' s participation in the UN' s peacekeeping forces improves relations with the local population, as well as general morale.
However, the presence of male peacekeepers leads to an increase in sexual violence and prostitution around the camps.
UN soldiers, including soldiers from EU countries, have been sent home following complaints of sexual violence in Somalia and Mozambique.
Peace is far too heavy a burden to be placed upon only one institution, one government or one sex.
Sustainable peace cannot be created if half the human race is ignored.
Peace can only be achieved if women participate fully in the peace process.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to thank the rapporteur, Mrs Theorin, for adopting this topic, the participation of women in peaceful conflict resolution, as the subject of a European Parliament own-initiative report.
Women are especially affected by wars and conflict situations because of their responsibility for their family, their children and the elderly, but also because they often assume sole responsibility in the absence of their husbands and fathers and accordingly often have to ensure, single-handed, that their family survives.
The situation is also particularly difficult for women, however, if they still have to fight for recognition and for equal rights in practice.
Decisions on implementing relief programmes are the responsibility of crisis teams, and the specialist knowledge and expertise of women is often not recognised or not given due respect by such teams.
Yet it seems all too obvious that the people to involve in such difficult situations are those who bear responsibility on the ground, on the home front as it were, and can contribute to resolving conflicts from their own experience.
As, unfortunately, this is not regarded as obvious, this report makes a very specific demand for women to be integrated into these bodies and for them to be given a participatory role.
The report denounces the fact that conflict situations are still associated with violent assaults and also appalling sexual assaults.
Preventative measures are needed, including the provision of special protection for women in refugee camps by segregating said camps.
We must help women who are victims of violence.
That much we agree on.
This chapter of violence against women in conflicts goes beyond the actual subject of this report and really should have been developed further in view of its importance and highly explosive nature.
The Theorin report goes into a lot of detail and repetition, which we in the Group of the European People's Party (Christian Democrats) and the European Democrats consider do not belong in an official document.
We also need to make sure that requests are made in a realistic framework.
For example, I hope that the compromise reached, which Mrs Theorin referred to in connection with Paragraph 12, will also gain the support of this House.
In areas where decisions are within the competence of Member States, we in the European Parliament can highlight changes and desirable improvements.
But we have no legal power to achieve them.
It is the responsibility of the Member States to take decisions regarding women in refugee camps.
The PPE-DE Group has gone to great pains to table appropriate amendments, and I ask honourable Members also to support the compromise amendment tabled by the rapporteur on Paragraph 12.
If we want our voice to be heard on the international stage, we must take matters forward through diplomatic channels, recognising their sensitivity.
Mr President, up until fairly recently, the role of women in matters of war and peace was very much a fringe issue in international organisations.
The subject was often exploited as a politically opportunist argument between warring parties.
This was also clearly the case with successive UN world conferences held since 1975, particularly with regard to the conflict in the Middle East.
Since the issue of women and peace itself carried little political weight, the utopian movements were able to dominate the debate.
There has been a sea change since the World Conference for Women held in Beijing in 1995.
It was there that the initial impetus was given to a mature treatment of the subject.
In particular, in the years that followed, a great deal of work was set in train within and around the UN and its associated organisations.
It is therefore high time that we put this into practice at European level too and, as has often proved to be the case with women' s rights issues, Europe is lagging behind somewhat in this area.
The aversion some men in this House have shown towards having a serious discussion of this issue means the writing is on the wall.
They obviously want to keep their powerful position in matters of foreign policy and defence for themselves, yet feel that men can promote women' s interests.
Mrs Theorin should be praised for the tenacity with which she has defended this issue in the face of considerable opposition.
On 31 October, the Security Council adopted a resolution entitled 'Women, peace and security' , following a two day debate.
Mrs Theorin referred to this earlier.
In terms of objectives, this resolution broadly resembles the proposal now on the table.
That too is an illustration of how important the issue is.
Finally, Mr President, I wish to express my disappointment at what I see as shifty manoeuvres that have lead to the watering down of Paragraph 12 concerning the rights and freedom of choice of women who fall victim to rape and states of war.
As far as I am concerned, these rights are not for haggling over.
Politically speaking, I would be more inclined to interpret the amendment in question, i.e. Amendment No 19, as a tactical defeat or a tactical withdrawal than a compromise on the substance, and in truth that is unworthy of this women' s issue.
Mr President, in common with other speakers, I should like to congratulate the rapporteur on her very comprehensive and commendable report containing a series of proposals which decision makers around the world ought to take on board and from which they ought to draw inspiration.
The problem with a report like this, however, is that it does not list its many proposals in order of priority.
Nor, I freely admit, was that the intention.
We are therefore easily in danger, however, of just moving on to the next subject once the vote has taken place.
I therefore wish to propose that we assign a level of priority to our next step and that we begin with what we can do in practical terms to put these proposals into practice in connection with the civil and military tool which is being developed in the course of these very months.
I shall therefore urge the Council, Mr Solana and the Commission, including Chris Patten, to go through the many ideas in the report and draw inspiration from them and then introduce these ideas and proposals into the work which is going on right now before our very eyes and the future practical implementation of which we unfortunately do not know very much about.
It may be a very good test of what all the words regarding equality, mainstreaming, the strengthening of the role of women etc. means in practice.
Let us begin with practical measures.
The Council and the Commission ought shortly to be coming back to Parliament with a report on what could be done.
There are many issues on the table to set to work on, for example, police education or the training of military personnel. There is certainly cause for increasing understanding of the fact that rape really is an atrocity that cannot be accepted, just as we cannot accept torture either.
There could also be training in involving NGOs and in developing facilities for people affected by crises etc.
We could subsequently hold hearings, seminars etc. on these subjects.
We should also, into the bargain, like to see openness about the whole process and about the development of these preventative measures.
If this could happen on the basis of involving women, then we might perhaps, suddenly and quite unexpectedly, have given the EU a human face in one particular area.
Mr President, I would like to start by expressing my interest in this report and to underscore its excellence.
Now we have to move on to practical work and I have two topical points to make.
As regards women, since women are participants in history, they must now become players in the peace process.
I am one of the ten women MEPs which went as a delegation to the Middle East two weeks ago, so it is topical - Mrs Morgantini will be able to fill you in on the details - not only so that women would be present in the peace process, but also so that there would be a European policy and that we women would support a European policy to promote peace in the Middle East.
We really need to be practical.
The second point concerns, not the female peacemakers, but the victims of war.
In two weeks' time, there will be a tribunal in Tokyo organised by NGOs.
This attempt at a tribunal to denounce what 'comfort women' were made to do during the Second World War will take place in December 2000. I call on this Parliament to support it.
This point is very important because this tribunal also wants to act as a pioneer and to be the first to raise the question of the crimes against humanity committed against women.
Comfort women, mostly from Korea, were raped and duped into becoming sexual slaves during the Second World War by Japan, which does not want to acknowledge this crime.
They were held prisoner.
There is now a film and witness statements which will be presented to this tribunal.
I hope, Mrs Theorin, that we will take an initiative on behalf of the Committee on Women' s Rights and Equal Opportunities to support this action with a view to recognising and making reparations for this crime against humanity perpetrated against women.
Mr President, Commissioner, the participation of women in the peaceful resolution of conflicts is necessary, unfortunately, because of the effect these conflicts have on women' s lives and because women do not traditionally play an active role in such conflicts.
The majority of refugees are women and children.
Women are double victims of armed conflicts since they are also subjected to rapes and sexual abuse, which have sometimes been used as weapons of war.
The serious problems which this causes women are increased, because they are then repudiated in their home communities.
It has been seen that the participation of women in the resolution of conflicts and in the organisation of refugee camps can be extremely positive.
We agree that rapes, forced pregnancy, forced sterilisation and any other type of sexual violence should be recognised as crimes against humanity, and legal texts should therefore be updated to protect women effectively.
Furthermore, there must be financial resources to help women who are victims of this situation.
Women' s participation in the diplomatic resolution of conflicts and in reconstruction initiatives would be of enormous help in achieving these objectives.
The training of men in all aspects of gender-related issues would also be of real help to the situation.
This report, which we consider to be important given the nature of the issue it deals with, is, nevertheless, too repetitive and contains certain elements which we do not like, but we recognise that it deals with a real problem which must be resolved and our group will therefore support it.
Mr President, Commissioner, currently, 90% of the victims of war and four-fifths of the world' s refugees are non-combatants, mainly women and children.
And yet, when we look at the participation of women in decision making about the prevention and resolution of armed conflicts or in peace initiatives, we see that they have a very limited presence.
We cannot allow this state of affairs to continue, because the rights, priorities and interests of women are often ignored in peace negotiations and also because the few examples of women in decision-making positions in these areas have proved to be very effective.
I shall mention just two examples that clearly illustrate what I have just said: Mary Robinson, who directs the United Nations' humanitarian aid programmes, has performed her duties with enormous courage and determination, visiting dangerous places in dangerous times, condemning appalling situations, and forcing countries and international bodies not to hide behind a complicit silence and to adopt the measures that are needed.
Portugal, which only opened up its diplomatic service to women following the "Revolution of April 1974" , has recently demonstrated with the case of East Timor and our ambassador to Indonesia, Ana Gomes, how the role of a woman and her sensitivity to the problems and sufferings of a people that fought unaided for its freedom for 25 years can be recognised by the whole world and especially here in the European Parliament.
The time has come to say "enough" to the absence of women in the settlement of this type of problem.
We must do so in a sensible but determined way, so that in future political leaders will be perfectly aware of the fact that wars are problems that affect everyone and not just men, that women suffer more than anyone and that for this very reason women should be represented in all organisations which address situations of armed conflict.
Above all, women should be represented in order to sound the alarm and, if possible, to prevent armed conflicts breaking out, or at least to mitigate such situations and to restore dignity to those who are innocent but who are nonetheless the main victims - women and children.
These are some of the reasons why we shall be voting in favour of this very important report.
Mr President, I would like to thank Mrs Theorin for her excellent report and for the initiatives it proposes.
As a feminist and a pacifist who is involved, together with other women, in building relations and bridges of peace in places of conflict, I have found that this report contains the wealth of experience gained from many peace-building projects carried out by women in recent years.
Peace is more than the absence of war: it is recognition of economic and social justice.
It is true that we women are those who suffer most in war zones but we are more than just victims: we are the bearers of alternatives to war and violence and the builders and protagonists of change.
There is the example of the international network of the 'Women in Black' who are against war and violence and have been demonstrating for 12 years in Israel against the military occupation of Palestine, in dialogue and solidarity with Palestinian women.
We women Members of Parliament also saw them during our visit to the Middle East at this tragic time.
Similarly, during the war in the former Yugoslavia, the 'Women in Black' of Belgrade built up relationships with Croatian and Bosnian women.
In various different countries of the world, we have transcended borders, united in the refusal to abide by national allegiance.
But these projects and the skills which women have, diplomacy on a practical level, which provides an alternative to State diplomacy, can no longer be disregarded; they must be used in decision-making forums and at all levels of diplomacy.
This is why more women must be involved in negotiations, in prevention operations, in management ...
(The President cut the speaker off)
Mr President, a great deal has already been said and I am not about to lapse into repetition.
I would like to congratulate Mrs Theorin for broaching a subject at European level that we have rarely discussed.
When I listen to the various comments made, I find myself agreeing with those who recommend that we take a look at our priorities and then limit the number of aims we want to achieve.
There is a great deal in the report and we will not be able to do everything straightaway.
I will mention several of my own priorities.
Firstly, we must urge all the Member States to ratify the Treaty of Rome.
Remarkably few have done so up to now; only two or three, so I am told.
So achieving that alone would be a start.
It is recognised in this Treaty that rape committed during wars, and all the consequences thereof, must be regarded as a war crime.
Perhaps that is exactly what you would expect in this day and age, but it certainly was not the norm up until very recently, nor did it happen as a matter of course.
Secondly, on 31 October a resolution was approved in the Security Council, namely resolution 1325, which 'calls for broad participation of women in peacebuilding and post-conflict reconstruction".
I am referring to the Security Council of the United Nations.
I think it would be worthwhile, under the circumstances, for the European Union to take a look at what points were raised too, because they have been adopted within the United Nations, and so they must also be taken on board at European level.
Around eighteen points were raised, which is quite a few.
Once again, my congratulations, and let us hope that something comes of it.
Mr President, Commissioner, I should like to start by congratulating Mrs Theorin on her excellent own-initiative report, which deals with an important and topical issue, i.e. how the fundamental participation of women in negotiations to resolve conflicts can change the world and turn the dominant culture of confrontation and violence into a culture of peace, dialogue and democratic conflict resolution.
This is made possible by the fact that, historically, women as a whole have stood for non-violence, have different experiences from men of war and conflict and devote all their time to protecting life with dialogue, reconciliation and negotiation.
These pacific qualities in women could provide an alternative solution, the basis for the foundations of a new civilisation, a civilisation of peace, in which dialogue is protected at all levels and from which war and violence are excluded as a means of resolving differences.
The absence of women, and of the pacific system of women, is all the more noticeable in areas in crisis, such as the Middle East, which I visited recently.
I am convinced that if women, both Palestinian and Israeli, had a say and a role in the peace process, there is every likelihood that a fair and viable solution to the Palestinian question would have been found and we would not now be facing the present crisis, which is the outcome of 7 whole years of failed negotiation.
In the case of Iraq, which I visited as a member of a mission to contest the embargo in practice, women would not, under any circumstances, have put political or military objectives above human life and would not have sacrificed 6,000 innocent children a month in the name of any form of political, economic or strategic interest in the area.
That is why this dimension needs to be taken into account when drawing up European Union policies in the future.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, first of all I would like to concur with the many interventions and congratulations delivered by other speakers, and I would particularly like to echo the sentiments expressed by Mrs Theorin in connection with the role of women in the peaceful resolution of conflicts.
It is an illuminating report, which has been drafted with great expertise. Some will even find it shocking in its boldness and honesty, but at least it tells the truth.
That is why I support the full report in its almost original form and we feel that the majority of the amendments tabled by our colleagues have the effect of watering it down and are even downright hypocritical in some cases.
Mrs Theorin has written a combative report and we hope that the aid for adoption centres will not be scrapped, see Amendment No 19c.
The Greens do not support the compromise text drawn up by our fellow delegates in connection with Amendment No 19.
I would like to congratulate Mrs Theorin on her boldness and strength of purpose.
Mr President, in my view, Mrs Theorin's report goes a long way towards meeting the requirement that women should have equal social status.
She has chosen her words carefully in denouncing violations of women's dignity and in demanding action to achieve change.
The report not only refers to the social exclusion of women as a problem in itself, it also rightly emphasises that protection against criminality and personal safety are no longer something that can be guaranteed solely within national borders.
I therefore support the demands made in the report for women to be given the right to diplomatic influence.
I support the initiative taken in this report and I support the statement contained in it that sexually abused women need the Community's protection and that it is high time the perpetrators stopped going unpunished.
Women and men, and people in general, are all different.
Equal opportunities means treating people differently - but how they are treated is still determined by the people themselves.
Mr President, the report by Mrs Theorin includes many bizarre and curious elements, and I have to say we should avoid the notion that armies are some sort of social service and that their guiding motive should be political correctness.
I want to focus briefly on just one paragraph of the report - Paragraph 3 - which condemns the use of so-called child soldiers.
Unfortunately terms are not defined and distinctions are not made.
We all condemn unreservedly the brutal abduction of children, some not even in their teens, particularly in certain African countries such as Sierra Leone or Uganda, and their corruption into murderous habits and involvement in barbaric practices such as mutilation and maiming.
These are not soldiers and they should be distinguished from young people in our own armed forces.
The trouble is that when we talk of child soldiers, then some interest groups use this as an opportunity to criticise distinguished institutions such as the British Army and this has happened recently.
As a guiding principle, we try to avoid sending young people into operational areas, but sometimes it happens and they serve with pride in well-disciplined units.
We should really avoid any possibility of confusing such honourable activity - which should be encouraged - with the sort of barbarism which I am sure the author of this report has in mind.
Mr President, I congratulate Mrs Theorin on this magnificent report and I believe that all of us, as women, should be happy, since it is we who are going to benefit directly or indirectly from her courageous and innovative proposals and contributions.
Mr President, this report opens up new territory in European policy, that of women' s' contribution to peace.
In my view, this territory is full of possibilities and could surely change the grim landscape of failures which, for centuries, have resulted from the exclusive domination of men.
In this field there has been nothing but shameful failures but nevertheless we are still faced with a brick wall which excludes women.
This is a very well informed, in-depth, and rigorous report, which is capable of stating fundamental principles with the clarity demonstrated in Paragraph 17. It is audacious but, at the same time, contains considerable practical sense and very necessary proposals.
Mr President, it is a great shame that it has had to be diminished for the sake of reaching a consensus!
My only consolation is that this says a great deal about Mrs Theorin' s parliamentary abilities.
It is shameful that nobody is here representing the Council.
Mr President, please tell me who is representing the Council at the moment, or the High Representative for the CFSP.
The new Common Foreign and Security Policy cannot be created by ignoring Parliament' s proposals or the will of the European women who wish to participate in it.
Please communicate our protest to the Council.
The absence of the Council in this debate is a grave error.
Mr President, it is usual to begin a speech by saying thank you for a job well done.
In my case, it is impossible to do that because I think that Mrs Theorin' s report ought to be rejected.
I also think that the draftsperson of the Committee on Women' s Rights and Equal Opportunities is on shaky ground when she maintains that there is broad support for a report adopted on the basis of eight votes in favour and five against.
It is an insult to Parliament to use an own-initiative report to push issues not covered by the mandate.
Mrs Theorin was to write an own-initiative report on women' s participation in peaceful conflict resolution.
Instead, the report deals with everything from the conditions experienced by women in refugee camps to the ways in which women develop strength and active influence.
In her eagerness to oppose everything that is evil, systematic rape and sexual slavery are condemned.
I for my part want to condemn all rape and all slavery.
There are points in the report, for example the issue of the various diplomatic corps, which might well be suited to a report that could be seriously discussed across all the committees, with parties concerned with foreign and security policy also involved in the discussion.
Mrs Theorin fought for a long time to stop Sweden becoming a member of the European Union.
Now, she is suddenly campaigning for the EU to determine which officials our foreign administration is to appoint.
There is a lack of consistency here.
Let us instead make conflict resolution an issue through which the conditions for peace at all levels and involving all players can be strengthened, rather than getting bogged down in gender issues.
I strongly object to the attitude of mind, expressed in this Chamber this evening, whereby one sex is made collectively guilty.
I think it is an insult to all those men who have died to defend freedom, peace and democracy in their own countries or in the context of peacekeeping efforts.
To create antagonism between the sexes, as there is a determination to do in this Chamber this evening, is neither peaceful nor constructive in my view.
That is why I and many others in addition to myself intend voting against this report tomorrow.
I do not, in fact, consider it to be a serious piece of work.
. (EL) Mr President, I think this really is an innovative report, an innovative resolution, one which introduces a new dimension into foreign policy in a very specific manner.
No one can claim that women would make better generals or better negotiators.
No one can claim that women are more democratic or more supportive of peace.
But what is clear in the resolution is that a basic social component is missing every time there is any political crisis management, every time there is any political conflict management and every time war takes its toll on society. The gender dimension is missing.
Women are not people with fewer or more capabilities, they just have a different take on society.
They are people with different experiences and these experiences are essential to the way in which policy is applied, especially in conflict management.
This state of affairs is described in the report with interesting and often shocking details.
However, I agree with some of the lady members who said that we need very specific objectives and measures if the gender dimension is to inform policies, programmes and individual projects.
Allow me to refer to some of the basic recommendations in the resolution which require action by the Commission.
First, the recommendation about raising the awareness of both sexes of initiatives for peace and security is, as far as the rapid reaction facility is concerned, already contained in the regulation which will be voted on 4 December and which clearly states that security and stability beyond the borders of the European Union must take account of the physical integrity of men and women wherever it is threatened.
Secondly, there are the regulations for human rights.
These regulations provide for a legal basis for our political activities vis-à-vis third countries as regards action taken by the Union to prevent conflict, deal with its consequences, implement confidence-building measures, promote humanitarian law and support international, regional and local organisations involved in conflict prevention.
All these projects funded by the European Commission already include the gender dimension.
Take the example of Angola: last year it received funding so that women and women's organisations could participate in endeavours to achieve final settlement of the crisis.
The third element is the participation of the European Community in rehabilitating victims of torture.
One of our aims is to pay particular attention to the special needs of women.
The first example occurred last year, with initiatives taken to provide medical, psychological and social support to exiled women in Bosnia.
The fourth example is the important role of women in the peace process which the European Community is supporting in the Balkans and in the Mediterranean basin.
The fifth point is the role of ECHO, the European Commission Humanitarian Aid Office, which has been invited by Parliament to help evaluate the gender dimension.
I must say that, as a rule, ECHO programmes do take account of the gender dimension and an effort is always made to include the gender dimension in many of the programmes funded by ECHO for the benefit of other organisations, such as the High Commissioner of the United Nations, the International Federation of Red Cross Societies and others.
And we have implemented specific projects over recent years on women's protection, health and social status and large chunks of the programmes are dedicated to them.
Finally, I should like to refer to the European Refugee Fund.
Article 4.2 states that, as far as terms of acceptance and access to asylum procedures are concerned, special measures may be taken for people who are especially vulnerable, such as women.
Again in connection with this programme, because it is mentioned in the resolution, I should point out that projects are undertaken by the Member States.
At the Commission's initiative, 5% of the resources may be provided for special projects, such as training civil servants at reception centres, the police and public hygiene officials in how to deal with the special needs of women refugees.
As the resolution stresses, the European Fund takes account, where possible, of the gender dimension in this activity.
Mr President, what is clear is that we are witnessing an initial stage in which the gender dimension, the participation of women, is starting to become, if not the rule, then at least an element in various programmes.
Clearly it is not enough.
Clearly it is an initial stage, but I think that, with political action and initiatives such as this resolution and with specific objectives which both Parliament and the Commission must set, we may bring about a change.
Thank you very much, Commissioner.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.
Before we continue with the agenda, I would like to make two comments.
Mrs Izquierdo Rojo complained earlier about the lack of a Council representative.
Mrs Izquierdo Rojo, the Council never attends sittings in the evening.
Part of the problem is that when we arrange the agenda we postpone important subjects until the evening.
The Conference of Presidents is responsible for this, and if we wish to change this, then we need to make sure that debates on renewable energy sources or important women's issues are not scheduled for the evening, because, as I have said, the Council is never present at that time.
If I may make a personal comment, I believe that we would make rather more progress, regardless of what you may think about the contribution of the only man taking part in this debate, if more men participated in debates of this kind.
Regulating domestic help
The next item is the report (A5-0301/2000) by Mrs Smet, on behalf of the Committee on Women's Rights and Equal Opportunities, on regulating domestic help in the informal sector (2000/2021(INI)).
Mr President, we are now descending to the level of a more everyday problem, namely the regulation of domestic work performed by third parties in private families, for that is the subject under discussion.
The problem is that millions of people, particularly women, undertake this type of work, and there is a huge demand for it, but it is not subject to any regulations whatsoever.
It would appear, from the limited amount of information available, to be a very extensive sector.
I have therefore tried to establish, in various countries, but also at European level, how many people - insofar as this can be established, because the people concerned are often working 'on the black' of course - work in this sector.
There are many millions of them.
I have sought in vain at European level for an all-encompassing study that could give us an idea of the scale of the sector and the problems within it, the regulations - however incomplete they may be - in the European countries, the pilot projects, and any experiments that may have been instigated by the left or right, but I have to say that there was nothing to be found in the Commission.
Hence my first suggestion to the Commission: set up an inquiry, get the funding for this - assuming it is needed - from the funding for women' s studies, for example, because this issue mainly concerns women after all, or get it from the funding for poverty studies because it is often poor women that do this type of work.
So I think both sources of funding should be considered, with a view to carrying out a comprehensive study of the issue and to finding out what kind of initiatives people are trying to get off the ground in particular countries.
That was my first specific question.
Secondly, if it is our intention to regulate the sector, then naturally we need to investigate a number of aspects.
The first aspect concerns the reconciliation of supply and demand.
It is not just the case that the demand for domestic help is on the increase whilst the supply of willing applicants is dwindling.
After all, who wants to work in a sector when you know it has to be done 'on the black' , and without social security, etc., etc.
In addition, there is nowhere at all where supply and demand can be matched.
So that is one aspect.
A second aspect is that the cost to the employer, i.e. the private family that employs domestic help on the regular market, the white market, must not be notably higher than the cost of such labour on the black market, because otherwise it stands to reason that undeclared work will remain the order of the day.
A third aspect is that the employee, i.e. the domestic help, must stand to earn more than they would from working 'on the black' .
Fourthly, we need to look into what kind of social statute can be established in this connection.
Finally, all this will inevitably involve financial intervention from the government, be it fiscal or parafiscal, because a private family would not be able to afford a full statute, even a limited one, and then they would all carry on taking people from the black market.
I believe the best thing to do would be to spur the Member States on to regulate the sector, via the employment guidelines, as has already been called for in Parliament' s opinion on these guidelines.
I would therefore like to ask the Commission what efforts it is going to make in future to adapt the employment guidelines, at least in terms of including this service in the section on services, and when does it intend to ask the Member States to start finding a solution to these problems?
I now come to my final point, that of migrant women, which is, of course, a very specific problematic area.
Many migrant women are here illegally in that they enter on a tourist visa and go back every three months, for example, to the Eastern block countries, to have the visa renewed, and work here as a domestic help in the meantime.
In some cases they are exploited and ill-treated.
There is no one to help them.
They fear that if they were to turn to someone their illegal situation would be exposed.
Hence it is imperative that we give special attention to their plight.
I have discovered over the past few weeks that there is a great deal of interest, both within international trade union circles and within a number of national trade union organisations.
I have had dealings with the Dutch, the Belgians and the Italians over this issue.
I would therefore advise the Commission to at least make a start on the search for a solution.
Mr President, Commissioner, domestic work is the oldest work that women have carried out.
This work has not been recognised or valued, either economically or socially.
Today it is part of what we call the hidden economy and this has a negative effect on those who carry it out and also on states' finances.
However, it is a form of work with a flexible timetable, which is of great assistance in reconciling family life with professional life.
Changes in family circumstances mean that this work is of increasing importance in the world of work, and it is therefore essential that this type of work be defined and that studies be carried out to assess the numbers of people involved.
This is an area of work that must be fully recognised and that should be included in the directives on employment to regulate the social rights of the worker.
The countries of the Union today have greatly differing situations, which should be standardised.
The workers, mostly women, should be provided with access to training.
The immigrant population is usually a significant group in this sector, and this requires special measures, such as specialised reception centres, which provide the necessary assistance.
This initiative report is very timely, since it deals with a growing need within the labour market.
Mrs Smet has done a wonderful job and of course we are going to support it.
Mr President, on behalf of my group, I would like to pay tribute to Mrs Smet for initiating the drafting of this report.
What we are in fact dealing with here is the breaking of a political taboo.
Because if you believe that domestic work should be recognised as an occupation in its own right, and Mrs Smet says that, and I echo her sentiments, then what you meet with in the first instance is disbelief and a lack of understanding.
I shall evaluate some of these arguments.
Argument one: should domestic work actually be defined as labour?
Should it feature among the labour statistics?
The answer is 'yes' , but then we will need a European definition, and the countries, the governments, will have to make more effort to get the issue of illegal work out into the open.
Argument two: are you in favour of introducing pay for housewives?
The answer is 'no' .
Any one demanding this is confusing two issues.
What we are discussing here is paid domestic service undertaken by third parties in private households.
We talk in terms of the 'werkster' (cleaning/char lady) in the Netherlands, and the 'poetsvrouw' (same meaning) in Belgium, where they also use the word 'interieur verzorgster' (interior attendant).
How amusing.
Argument three.
Regulating the work done by cleaning ladies would simply be making undeclared work all above board, and surely that would make it far too expensive?
Now we have reached the heart of the matter.
Domestic work is performed by the type of person who stands the least chance on the labour market.
Women with an inadequate and out-of-date educational background, etc., etc.
They are completely reliant on domestic work with irregular working hours and no form of legal security or social protection whatsoever.
This form of exploitation takes place because the employers, i.e. the families that the domestic helps work for, can claim complete innocence, given the lack of legislation.
However, since there is going to be increased demand for domestic servants owing to social changes, it is high time we reviewed the relationship between the domestic workers, the employers and the authorities.
The question as to how exactly we should go about this, requires a great deal more study and deliberation.
But whatever happens, we must ensure that this type of work is established in a legal and social framework which affords those concerned recognition and social security cover, and which improves the quality of the work itself.
This would also benefit the employers and so it would be quite reasonable to expect them to make a proportionate contribution to the costs involved.
Mr President, Commissioner, I want to begin by thanking the rapporteur.
Allow me to state that domestic work is important.
It must be respected, and it needs to be valued more highly.
Those of us in the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party are therefore able to back most of the report' s conclusions.
We shall nonetheless be voting against the report as a whole in the light of the subsidiarity principle.
This is an issue for the Member States.
Certain proposals are too detailed.
The following are nonetheless important points for the Member States to take into account. Attention needs to be given to situations in which women have two jobs.
Domestic work is often heavy, involving many places of work. Wages are too low, there is an increase in illicit work, and a situation often prevails in which women, often immigrants, are the first to be exploited.
Many end up outside the social security systems.
In the interests of a social Europe, the Member States have an urgent duty to ensure that immigrant women, often from the applicant States, obtain tolerable working conditions.
A broader approach to domestic work would enable many people, including young people and immigrants, to see such work as a good way of getting into the labour market.
'Legitimate' domestic help is often too expensive nowadays when VAT and employers' charges have to be paid.
Experiments involving tax deductions and ways of simplifying the system ought to be made.
It must be made easier to start up and run companies which provide domestic help.
In my own country, Sweden, two main arguments are often advanced against facilitating paid domestic help.
First of all, that it would militate against equality between men and women.
Wrong!
It would make things easier for many families and increase equality.
Many women can opt to have careers and go out to work if they are given help with practical tasks - perhaps that is the case for some of the women in this Chamber.
The second argument is that it would create a B team within the labour market.
Wrong!
All those who are at present engaged in illicit work would obtain work with decent social conditions.
There are therefore both economic and moral reasons in favour of the report's intentions, but these issues must be resolved at national rather than EU level.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, it is a very interesting report on the regulation of domestic help which the rapporteur, Mrs Smet, has tabled, but I do in fact have mixed feelings about it.
It is, of course, absolutely essential to try to get to grips with illicit work within different sectors of society, especially when it comes to domestic services.
It is also high time that we accorded more status to work in the home and recognised domestic work as a perfectly valid occupation.
It is important, too, to ensure that immigrant women are not exploited in terms of everything from poor wages to a lack of social security and outright oppression.
To demand, as proposed in the report, that the Member States use a directive or some other form of legislation both to adjust prices and to offer tax deductions for domestic services would, however, be to send out a completely wrong signal.
It would be to go too far and would also be the wrong route to take.
It is inconsistent with the determination to see domestic work as a perfectly valid occupation.
What, in fact, is the rationale behind saying that you are to have tax deductions for having your floors polished but not for having your rubbish taken away?
To see domestic services as something completely different from other services is not at all the same thing as raising the status of domestic work.
Finally, I just want to add that I should like to have seen a report which acknowledged that, within the near future, we shall be in great need of the manpower offered by our immigrants.
Mr President, Commissioner, domestic helps, who were formerly almost exclusively employed by more wealthy households, nowadays provide much-needed and essential support for working men and women and, above all, for single mothers and the elderly.
Demand has risen many times over in recent years, and yet this fact has scarcely been taken into account in general working life and as regards the rights and duties involved.
Just where does this activity fit into the scheme of things?
We need a legal framework that recognises domestic work, which is given many different names, as a fully fledged job in all Member States, and which provides for the implementation of appropriate labour law provisions.
A pan-European description of domestic work as an occupation is needed, bringing in the social partners, and where this does not exist employment policy guidelines should be adopted.
However, defining domestic work is certainly difficult.
Where do you draw the dividing lines with such a variety of domestic duties?
Is domestic work just cleaning or cooking, or just child care or just gardening?
The fact is that there are thousands of women who have been doing all these jobs for years without insurance cover or pension rights.
Of course, both employers and workers - generally both women - are often happy with this state of affairs, which saves money.
We need to educate people and to expand and improve the basic framework that already exists in some countries, so as to provide incentives to phase out the present grey economy.
In Austria, and especially in my own region, an EU-assisted project involving a women's advice centre acting as an agency for domestic helps has been very successfully running for three years.
Many women have been able to obtain a permanent job through this work.
In addition, as a result of this project, two or three families have often clubbed together to employ a domestic help.
What we are talking about is registering every contractual relationship between employer and employee and ultimately enhancing the work prospects of domestic employees.
Mr President, I am forced to admit, following Mrs Smet's report to Parliament, which I welcome, that I am in the unfortunate position of having to say that the Commission has no special policy or information on regulating domestic help in the informal sector and on transferring domestic help from the informal to the legal economy.
Of course, we do have the Commission communication on undeclared work which was recently adopted by Parliament and which could be used as a basis, including by the Member States in collaboration with the Commission, for policies to bring domestic work within the legal economy.
According to the communication, the first two basic steps are, first, you must record and compile statistics on domestic help - as Mrs Smet has said, there are as yet no statistics at European level or in many Member States on this problem - and, secondly, you must deal with it by integrating it into the overall strategy on employment.
This strategy to transfer undeclared workers to the legal economy calls for a combination of individual policies which might be sanctions in the case of exploitation, information campaigns, which are needed at all levels, on the benefits of legalising these people and, thirdly, constant effort to harmonise and modernise legislation.
We have little experience and few Member States have specifically tackled the problem of domestic help.
I am loath at present to commit myself and say that we could tackle it through the employment guidelines for 2002.
However, what I can say is that the guidelines for 2001 are the first to clearly mention undeclared work and that we intend to work on the basis of the proposal in the conclusions and compile statistics and studies to record the problem so that we can hold a second debate and discuss what the next step should be at European level.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon.
(The sitting was closed at 12 midnight)
Address by Mr Kostunica, President of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
Mr President, it is with tremendous pleasure, profound respect for you and the people of Yugoslavia, and with great hope for the future that is opening up in your country and in the new relations between us that the European Parliament welcomes you here today.
I extended this invitation to you on the very day on which the result of the democratic elections left us with no shadow of a doubt of the will of the people, which had been expressed freely and overwhelmingly in your favour.
Now that the dark pages of the last ten years have been turned, your presence before this House bears witness to our common desire to see Yugoslavia quickly rediscover its rightful place in the family of Europe.
You expressed this wish yourself when you took office and, for its part, the European Union immediately made the first significant gesture of confidence that you were seeking, the lifting of international sanctions.
We were sitting in the first part-session in October when, at the time we were debating the situation in Yugoslavia, we learned of the courageous reaction of the Serbian people and, ladies and gentlemen, you well remember I am sure, we immediately called for international sanctions to be lifted.
But the jubilation accompanying this great victory for freedom, which you gained by peaceful means at great risk to your own freedom, must not lead us to underestimate the enormous challenges that await you: the consolidation of democracy; the restoration of peace and harmony among all the communities living in Yugoslavia; its reconstruction with a view to rediscovering the road to prosperity; its peaceful relations with its neighbours; the return of displaced people to their villages; those missing in action, whose families desperately wait for news; the necessary cooperation, when the time comes, with the International Court of Justice in the Hague, to ensure that what took place can never happen again and, finally, of course, the institutional future of Kosovo, whose wounds are still open, as well as the future of Montenegro.
The European Parliament is indeed well aware that, after ten years of conflict, not everything is possible in Yugoslavia, at least not straightaway, and that urgent actions need prioritising.
The Balkans, to which you belong, are on the dividing line between the great civilisations and religions which have, all too often, left their tragic mark on our common past as Europeans - on you and us alike.
As regards the most sensitive issues that remain to be resolved, notably in relation to Kosovo, the European Parliament has always hoped that peaceful solutions will be found, in accordance with UN resolutions on the integrity and sovereignty of Yugoslavia, in terms of fundamental human rights.
Rest assured, Mr President, that it is in this spirit that the European Parliament, co-decider of the Community budget, will lend you its full support so that European aid for the reconstruction of your country is truly in line with its needs.
More specifically, as far as necessary emergency measures are concerned, as you know, on Monday, the first convoy of tankers transporting heating fuel and heating oil from the European Union arrived in your country.
As your Minister for Mines and Energy, Mr Antic, so aptly remarked, I see in this the proof that Serbia has friends in Europe.
I would like to conclude by saying that the European Union is preparing to welcome more than ten countries from Central and Eastern Europe who have regained their own freedom and democracy.
Their accession will be a major step towards the reunification, in an expression of solidarity, of the family of states and peoples that make up Europe.
I am certain that there are many of us in this Chamber who are in no doubt that, one day, if Yugoslavia so wishes, the doors of the European Union will open to welcome it in.
This would be entirely natural, as we are on the same continent of Europe and we share the same values.
Mr President, we are very much looking forward to your address and we hope it will trace out the paths of our rediscovered cooperation and brotherhood, which we will henceforth be travelling along together.
(Sustained applause)
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, is there any political institution before which we could talk more openly and sincerely about the historic wishes and political aspirations of a small European people than the European Parliament?
Europe is lucky to have such a representative body elected directly by citizens, although, for the time being, we are talking about a rather small number of countries.
It is also a great pleasure to lay before such a forum, even in this brief address of mine, the internal problems of a country that, having gone through its own historic storm, has finally made out the coast of peace and freedom on the horizon.
There is no better landmark for the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in its state recovery and social development than the European Union.
It is crystal clear that it will take time before our country will be truly able to become a member of this grandiose transnational establishment.
But now, in the wake of the decisive political turn of 24 September, or the even more decisive shift of 5 October, the major goal in Yugoslavia's foreign policy is to approach in a comprehensive manner a family of nations comprising the European Union and then join it.
It is precisely the European Union's experience that sets a shining example not only for European countries that have yet to join, but also the whole world, when it comes to a direction mankind should take if it wishes to leave behind force, wars and domination as the means to achieve particular national interests.
Having created this community of nation states, the European Union has opened the perspective of a new era for all mankind.
And not only in terms of the results achieved, but, perhaps even more so, in terms of the way in which they were achieved.
Thereby Europe has demonstrated the vitality of its civilisation within the framework of world history, and its capacity for creative political imagination for its future development.
Just as the onset of the new century coincided with Europe's invention of a new political forum, the nation state, whereby it overcame the crisis of medieval particularism, in this post-modern time of ours Europe has invented a higher form of political organisation, a transnational community which helped it meet the challenges of globalisation.
The European Union model is a double challenge for Yugoslavia as a Balkan country.
First of all, we in principle prefer a non-coercive way of integration into European economic, cultural and political courses, given that we have encountered different domination strategies devised by great powers throughout our contemporary history.
Secondly, the step-by-step approach Western European countries have taken towards integration is a model we should adopt in the Balkan processes of integration in order to qualify for entry into the European Union.
We are aware that none of the Balkan countries will be able to join the European Union on its own, which makes it clear we have to develop good neighbourly relations, free trade and collective security structures first.
We are certain that the European Union will support precisely that kind of development of South-Eastern Europe, and contribute to overcoming the historic shortcomings of those countries through the Stability Pact for South-Eastern Europe and in other ways.
It is because of our firm commitment to step on the soil of European development that we wish to sign the Association Agreement with the European Union as soon as possible, and use the provisions of the agreement to direct our political and economic recovery, and subsequent development, towards European integration.
We are aware that in that desirable case we would have to change many of our habits and institutions of political and economic life, both as a people and as a state.
Not only should we build democratic institutions, a task we have already embarked on, we should also imbue them with the democratic spirit, which may prove much more difficult.
Not only are we to carry out privatisation of our centralised economy, but also create a legal system that would guarantee the freedom of business operations and the entire economic process.
Not only are we to create the internal system of freedom and peace, but also harmonise it with the rules and customs that the European Community and the European Union have maintained for decades.
Simultaneously with building the confidence of our citizens in our state institutions, we have to persuade them to trust the European institutions that, in nearly fifty years of their existence, have brought to their citizens lasting peace and prosperity.
The democratic changes that began in Yugoslavia on 5 October have produced at miraculous speed extraordinary results on the international political plane.
Yugoslavia has regained its seats in the United Nations and the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe, joined the Stability Pact for South Eastern Europe, while proceedings for its admission to the Council of Europe have been initiated.
Our most important task now is to begin to settle democratically internal relations in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
Kosovo, of course, is unquestionably our most difficult problem.
There cannot be any doubt that the issue of Kosovo's status is a democratic issue.
We have proceeded from the point that the UN Security Council Resolution 1244 offers possibilities of intensifying many important humanitarian and democratic processes.
We need European assistance and support in securing the return of Kosovo refugees to their hearths as soon as possible in the spirit of the best democratic traditions.
Of course, we need great help in rehabilitating their destroyed homes so that the refugees have somewhere to return.
We call upon Europe to come resolutely to our aid in creating security and the economic conditions to help the exiled feel completely safe on return to their homes.
I believe Europe has both the strength and the will to help us exercise the fundamental right of each and every human being to live in his own home.
Also, we will need Europe's assistance in establishing and resolving the great ecological problems caused by the use of depleted uranium in the bombing of Yugoslavia.
We are ready to begin open dialogue with Albanian parties about political, humanitarian, security and all other key issues of relevance to a democratic solution to Serbian-Albanian relations in Kosovo.
When it comes to relations between Serbia and Montenegro within the federal state, the former, non-democratic organisation of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia seriously threatened the functioning of the state.
The first step ahead of us in a bid to restructure the federal state constitutionally is to define a framework for the broadest possible democratic dialogue about the character of relations between the two republics.
It will take a lot of patience and wisdom for us to identify, through talks in the republican and federal parliaments and a wide public and expert debate, the best solution for restructuring the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia into a good, operational, rich and just state that cares about the interests of its citizens, and safeguards the full equality of the nation-building traditions of Montenegro and Serbia.
It is important to say that Muslims and Albanians inhabit Serbia and Montenegro in significant numbers.
There is not a single good reason for them not to be a factor of integration in Yugoslavia.
A democratic joint state makes it possible for Muslims and Albanians in Montenegro and Serbia to live in a single state, and enables us to join forces in building our equally joint state.
Support from Europe is essential in our effort to seek solutions through sincere dialogues only and with respect for full democratic procedure, without pressures and ultimatums on any part.
On the other hand, we would like to be given a chance to prove to Europe that we are able to develop the constitutional equality of Serbia and Montenegro within Yugoslavia on our own, by recognising the genuine principles of democracy.
Development and local self-rule inYugoslavia is the issue we pay special attention to.
We are aware that it is the very core of any democratic system, and it is with due consideration that we are analysing European and our own experiences in developing local self-government.
The grave situation in the Yugoslav economy has been discussed at length.
The humanitarian aid to our country that has been initiated is priceless, but we hope that Europe will replace it with investment programmes that would make it possible for us to work and earn enough for a normal life.
Bearing in mind all these enormous problems, it is clear that our road to rightful entry into Europe, in which Serbia and Montenegro used to have places worthy of them, will be a long one.
Yet it is certain that our chances today are much more realistic than they were a mere month and a half ago.
Perhaps the citizens of the European Union can understand that best if they evoke their historic memory and those long-past years after World War II, when the prospects for the Continent and European civilisation itself were extremely uncertain.
Then your brave predecessors embarked on an uncertain project that bore historic fruit.
You, the representatives of the European Parliament, who directly represent the citizens of its member countries, the citizens of Europe, are best placed to understand why the very possibility of entry into Europe seems extremely uncertain to us, the citizens of the present-day Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
Therefore, as the first democratically elected President of Yugoslavia, I am turning to you not so much because of much needed assistance in the reconstruction of the country as because of your support and understanding of the situation our people and our state are in.
After all, Europe is a home we all share.
(Loud and sustained applause)
Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting
Let us resume our session.
I should explain to you that there appears to be a gremlin in the system somewhere in the building.
The people who installed the system have been here for some time trying to find out where the problem is.
It seems to be an intermittent problem.
I hope it can be resolved as soon as possible.
The Minutes of the previous day's sitting have been distributed.
Are there any comments?
Mr President, on page 27 of the annex to the Minutes my vote is recorded as having been cast in favour of Amendment No 20 to the Morillon report.
I do not subscribe to the views of that amendment and I would wish that my vote be recorded as having been cast against it.
That will be put in order in the next Minutes, Mr Watson.
Mr President, on behalf of Mrs van der Laan and myself I want to register that we voted against Amendment No 15 in the Morillon report.
We want to be registered as voting in favour of the release of Leyla Zana and the other Kurdish prisoners.
Mr President, it might be helpful if I could make a procedural point on this matter.
Yesterday my group, as in so many votes in this House, were on automatic pilot, but some of us rather crash-landed, as we discovered, in the vote in respect of Amendment No 15, which was from the GUE Group and called for the release of Mrs Zana and others.
We had voted the wrong way.
I have already had a correction made but I would ask you formally to facilitate through the day the possibility for colleagues in the ELDR Group to contact sessional services.
Some are not here now, partly because of the interruption and partly because the issue had not been foreseen.
I would welcome your assistance in the matter.
(The Minutes were approved)
Mr President, what I have to say concerns rather the future than the past, in other words, I would just like to make sure that we are to vote on the BSE issue in today' s vote.
This is a very important matter for the public, and one that is of interest to them, and it would be only right to get a decision on the matter this afternoon.
(Parliament approved the request)
Public access to documents of the European Parliament, the Council and the Commission
The next item is the report (A5-0318/2000) by Mr Cashman on behalf of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs on the proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council regarding public access to European Parliament, Council and Commission documents [COM(2000) 30 - C5-0057/2000 - 2000/0032(COD)].
I have the honour to present this report on a subject that is crucial to the lives of the people we represent and, indeed, to the future of the Union.
My aim throughout the report has been to produce a proposal which is politically mature, eminently reasonable and practical for both the institutions and the citizen.
I believe my report reflects that and the view of my fellow rapporteur, Mrs Maij-Weggen, to whom I pay special tribute.
Let me stress that this is a legal text; it must be detailed and watertight.
It is not an information pamphlet.
That will come later.
However, I regret that the report has been misrepresented by some for short-term political gain.
A few cheap headlines, a few inches of print remove such people from reality.
This report is even more urgent in light of the rules which were adopted by the Council in August, the so-called 'Solana Decision' .
My report specifically states that the August Decision should be repealed along with other decisions.
What we are seeking is a change of culture.
As a collection of 15 Member States we approach the issue of public access to documents differently, but I am glad to see that, largely, the European Parliament stands as a bulwark against the forces which seek to keep the doors of the institutions closed to the public.
Access to documents and information regarding the activities of the institutions enables citizens to hold the EU governing bodies accountable and stimulates greater efficiency.
I remain confident that, with the crucial input of Mrs Maij-Weggen, we have produced a mature and sensible text and introduced revolutionary changes for the institutions, but also real and tangible benefits for the European citizens.
It is clear that Article 255 of the Treaty permits a broader interpretation of citizens' access to documents of the institutions, so allow me to outline some of the changes in my report.
All the institutions and bodies covered by Article 255 should be expressly stated in the regulation and should include not only committees and working groups, but all agencies created by the institutions.
All documents of the institutions should be public unless there is good reason why they should not be - based on a harm test and on a limited number of exceptions.
These exceptions are discretionary, not as others would have you believe, mandatory.
The term 'document' should be interpreted widely and must include internal documents of the institutions, although information documents, the 'space to think' , can be excluded.
As in the Commission proposal, a register of documents should be established.
It should contain documents which are directly accessible.
It should also include documents which are classified as 'non public' with the exception that applies.
That way, the public knows of the documents and can challenge such classification.
Furthermore, access to documents must be user-friendly via the Internet or traditional methods and there will be ongoing scrutiny - extremely important - of the new process and implementation by Parliament.
I would like to clarify some other aspects.
The classification system outlined in my report is intended to make the process of access to documents easier.
An application for a document would challenge the application of the exception.
At the time of the request for a document, the application of the exception must be reviewed on a case-by-case basis.
What we must ensure is that the existing or future interinstitutional agreements, referred to in my report, have as their legal basis the Article 255 rule in order to ensure that a coherent framework is agreed between the institutions, with the maximum right of access for the citizen.
Some Members have suggested that in my text I come too close to the Council and Commission view.
In fact, the fundamental problems which the Council and Commission foresee with my report are, interestingly enough, the very same differences apparent between the majority of Parliament and some of the smaller groups in this House.
Therefore, I urge the Council and Commission to embrace the change.
The Union must move closer to the citizen.
It must be more accountable and more transparent, especially as we approach enlargement.
Together we must seize this opportunity and together solve the problems that it poses.
I urge the House to support my report.
Mr President, it was a long time before the European Commission submitted a proposal in the field of openness of government.
A number of MEPs had been asking for one for years.
At the beginning of this part-session I even submitted a complete proposed initiative to the Committee on Constitutional Affairs.
The latter then announced that it would produce a concrete proposal within six months, and it has kept its word.
It is just a shame that the content was not what we had expected it to be.
There has been a fair amount of criticism on the part of the journalist organisations, the NGOs, a number of Member States and also Parliament.
It therefore comes as no surprise that there is a broad package of amendments, so broad in fact that the regulation is being adapted to a quite considerable extent.
Adapted to the legislation on openness of government in a number of Member States, but also to the Freedom of Information Act of the kind in force in the United States.
After all, why would we want to give our European citizens less openness with regard to Brussels than the Americans get with regard to Washington?
So there is a huge number of amendments and I would like to thank the rapporteur for the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, Michael Cashman, for his cooperation with the Committee on Constitutional Affairs and with myself.
What we have before us is, in fact, the work of these two committees.
So what are the most important amendments?
The most crucial one is of course the amendment relating to Article 4, in which the Commission laid down 17 exceptions for access to documents and we managed to whittle the exceptions down to six.
Moreover, when it comes to information on military and defence matters we suggest that an interinstitutional agreement should be concluded between the Council and Parliament so that secret information can be imparted to a so-called select committee.
This committee could then assess if it was right to keep it secret.
In this way, Parliament would function as a link between the Council and the citizens, and that is why it is entirely appropriate that this proposal should be incorporated into this regulation.
Another important amendment is the proposal to have not just the Council, the Commission and Parliament fall within the scope of the regulation, but also all the external bodies.
Why should we not force these bodies, which are funded by the Commission and whose staff are European officials, to adopt a culture of openness?
I think that is a very important point, and a substantial annex will be appended to this regulation in order to ensure that this is done.
Turning now to classification: in short, I completely agree with what Michael Cashman had to say.
I, too, find it quite hard to understand the criticism voiced by the Liberals and the Greens because classification is exactly what we need to achieve openness.
That explains why the Council has such an aversion to the idea.
I consider a fifth important amendment to be that relating to the annual report, which must relate specifically to the documents that must be kept secret, or which are kept secret at any rate.
That could be reviewed again on an annual basis in order to establish whether it is reasonable or not.
The European Commission has advised us on an informal basis that it has not quite finished working out the position vis-à-vis Parliament.
That might not be a good thing, but if Mr Cashman is of the same mind then we can consider whether it might be possible to postpone the final vote.
Finally, Mr President, this proposal is particularly important in terms of democratic standards within the Union.
That is what it is all about, i.e. the citizens, which is why I hope that the broad majority here in Parliament will vote in favour of this document.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the right to become acquainted with the contents of the documents of the European Union' s institutions is a precondition of the public' s ability to monitor decision-making generally and influence it.
At present, we are creating an open and modern-style administration, in which it is natural that the public should have this direct right.
Obviously there have to be limits to such a right, and that is something we are also discussing today.
At the moment in the European Union there already exists the practice of public access to documentation, and we should remember that brave citizens and many progressive Member States have been fighting for increased transparency for many years.
We are not exactly starting this discussion from scratch: we can consider it our duty to see to it that transparency is increased and the criteria of the Treaty of Amsterdam are met.
The report we are now examining in many respects takes the situation in a better direction.
It is excellent that the report should state that public access to documents and the obligation to release documents affect all the institutions, and not just the three main ones.
It is also excellent that the institutions should be obliged, or they should be allowed, rather, to release documents also to those not resident in the European Union, or who are not citizens of the European Union.
This principle should be strengthened further. Ladies and gentlemen, you can no doubt imagine that one day an EU citizen will need information, for example, on what the administration in the United States of America is doing.
In fact, there is no reason for restricting public access geographically.
However, the report does not sufficiently explain how possible separate provisions, which would remain in force at the same time as this regulation, would meet the criteria of greater transparency.
This is a vague area, and it is possible that more restrictive provisions may also remain in force, and this is one point in respect of which we have tabled amendments.
As regards the definition of documents, this is a crucial question, and we could surely argue about just that for a whole year, which is probably what has happened.
It is essential that scope for practising some degree of internal thought process should be allowed for the institutions, but we have to be very careful here, as we might create a situation in which documents drafted to prepare a decision may be excluded from the principle of transparency, and obviously decision-making cannot then be influenced.
In my opinion, the report also goes too far in its recognition of the rights of so-called third parties to restrict the availability of documents.
It may be the job of the Council and the Commission to uphold such restrictions, but I think it is not in the interests of Parliament or the public.
The list of exceptions, as Mrs Maij-Weggen said, is essential, and perhaps the most important part of this work.
That aspect of the matter has made substantial progress, but I would like to focus special attention on the fact that if we want our citizens to be able to follow general developments in security policy in the future, I repeat, general, an exception regarding defence, security and military matters is much too broad in scope.
It should be defined more precisely or a harm test should be attached to it.
Mr President, the right of Members of Parliament to confidential documents is a very important issue, but it cannot replace the direct right of access to information on the part of the public.
Parliament still needs to work on this report more, and for that reason I believe that it must be improved upon still here.
Mr President, openness and public scrutiny of the basis of a democratic form of government are the prerequisites for citizens being able to follow the public decision-making process and to participate in this process.
The opportunity of gaining access to public documents creates greater confidence and legitimacy, something the EU has precious little of at present.
International research also shows a clear connection between open administration and a low level of corruption.
The Cashman report is, therefore, not just any old report.
This report establishes the essence of what will become a European principle of public access to official documents, that is to say, the principle that all documents must be publicly available.
There will be few exceptions and these will be clearly regulated.
All documents must be registered.
The documents must be examined on a case-by-case basis.
If access is refused, a reason for this must be provided.
The Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy objects to the idea that documents relating to foreign affairs and security issues will automatically and collectively be excluded from public inspection.
This would be unacceptable.
In this sphere, too, every document must be examined individually.
We have therefore proposed, as a democratic safety valve, that those documents which - after examination - cannot be made public, could be communicated to a small group of Members of Parliament.
However, it is important that this in no way replaces the desire for as many documents as possible to be made available to the public at large: journalists, interest groups and individual citizens.
Article 255 of the EC Treaty concerns citizens' access to documents.
The rights of the institutions ought to be developed further in separate provisions.
The Cashman report is the first step on a long road towards increased openness, democracy and confidence on the part of our citizens.
A common directive is necessary and important.
Much work will also be needed in order to change the attitudes and the culture within the different institutions and progressively replace them with an understanding that openness is necessary, natural, effective and democratic.
We now await the Council's move.
Mr President, like Mrs Malmström, I too would like to emphasise that transparency is the essential precondition for democratic control and participation of citizens in the decision-making process.
Transparent procedures enable the administration to enjoy greater legitimacy and to be more effective and closer to the citizen.
They also provide effective protection against the arbitrary use of and the abuse of power and against corruption.
These are the considerations that led the Committee on Budgetary Control to deliver an opinion under this procedure.
We are glad that the report repeats a crucial principle that we in the Committee on Budgetary Control also vehemently support.
It is this: there can only be exceptions to the requirement of transparency in exceptional cases.
That is why we cannot accept the long list of exceptions set out by the Commission.
Here we are sending out the right signal to the citizens by radically cutting the list of these exceptions in our Amendment No 30, but, personally speaking, I find it most regrettable that we have only managed to simplify and clarify matters on this particular issue, however important it is, and not in the regulation as a whole.
Unfortunately, the wish to anticipate any eventualities and to produce a regulation that is as complete and comprehensive as possible seems to have prevailed.
Instead of a shorter text, we are therefore ending up with a longer one.
I fear that will make it less legible or user-friendly.
So it will become even more important for the citizen not to be left on his own with this regulation, but that each institution should establish contact points to which applicants can turn and where they can obtain practical assistance in their search for documents.
If we really want to make it easier for the citizens to exercise their rights in practice, we will need specially trained staff in these contact points, who can, so to speak, take the citizen who is seeking information by the hand and guide him through the complex labyrinth of the institutions.
The same applies to the use of languages.
Mr President, Article 255 of the Treaty is now, therefore, to be implemented and, with the Cashman report, we are moving a long way in the right direction, but not far enough.
All the same, I should very much like to commend the considerable work Mr Cashman has put into this report.
As I see it, it is one of the most important pieces of work done this year.
The statement by the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport, too, in fact goes farther than the Commission had proposed.
We drew inspiration from the Nordic models for transparency in administration, for the Nordic countries have a very long tradition of having the right of access to documents.
Naturally enough, it has also been the task of the Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport to emphasise that the language in the rules must be as clear, simple and understandable as possible. In the same way, we have also pointed out that openness and transparency are the best tools for solving the problems which may arise as a result of cultural and linguistic differences between the Member States, on this issue too.
As I see it, right of access to documents is an important part of the EU' s information and communication policy.
All investigations have, of course, revealed the distance between the European citizen and Brussels, and people themselves think they know too little about the EU.
What they learn is at the media' s discretion or depends upon special interest groups, and they often feel powerless over and against the institutions.
Now, they will be given the opportunity also to acquire some insight into circumstances which do not receive the special attention of the mass media and special interest groups and, in that way, they will be better able to participate in the open and democratic debate which is so important to confidence in the EU.
I hope the Commission will make a big effort to inform people, including the man in the street, about this legislation, for the media and the special interest groups will no doubt find their own way to the documents they are interested in.
I also hope that the Council and the Commission can give us a commitment today to continuing to deal with this issue in a positive way so that we might, as quickly as possible, start making the necessary changes to the business procedures in such a way as to benefit people and the image of the institutions.
At a hearing in September in the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, we learned that it takes ten years for an administration to change mentality, so the sooner we get started the better.
Mr President, a lot of wise things have been said regarding the background to this report.
I nevertheless think that we should emphasise that this is a question of standing matters on their heads.
It is now a question of giving citizens the power to control the institutions.
In the opinion of the Committee on Petitions, the importance of registers is mentioned.
Registers are important if we are not to have a form of public access to documents that is insider access.
The Committee would like all documents to be included, irrespective of whether they have been drawn up by the institutions or whether the institutions have them in their possession.
Of course, the institutions can be given time to consider documents, but in that case it is not a question of forever preventing these documents from being released.
When this time is up, it must also be possible for these documents, too, to be evaluated.
We must also do the balancing mentioned by Mr Cashman as rapporteur.
We must always weigh different interests against each other: the interests of having a public discussion and the interests of protecting individual people, for example.
It is also important that the parties affected have rights.
We wish to emphasise that these parties must have more rights than the general public.
However, the issue here is the public's, not Parliament's, access to documents.
The Committee on Petitions would like to see shorter waiting periods before documents are released.
Time is power in our society.
We would also like to emphasis the important role the Ombudsman has played in the progress that has, nevertheless, been made.
I believe that he will also have an important role to play in the future.
We would also like to underline the fact that this is not a matter of harmonising national regulations.
National cultures must be able to continue, for example in the country I come from, where some time ago the whole principle of public access to official records was conceived.
Mr President, the Cashman report can be summarised in four words: citizens' power over bureaucracy.
The general public's right of access to the EU institutions' documents is one of the mainstays in the establishment of an open and democratic EU.
Access to information also stimulates increased efficiency.
This is a significant step towards a more open and more democratic EU.
It is gratifying that Parliament has succeeded in producing a large majority in favour of more openness.
I would like to thank the rapporteur, Mr Cashman and also Mrs Maij-Weggen for an excellent collaboration, which has in fact created a good basis for the continued negotiations.
There are no block exemptions relating to foreign affairs or security, and neither must there be any block exemptions in these areas in the future.
The principle of access to documents must of course include all the institutions and bodies of the EU.
It is therefore extremely important that we keep a record, a register, so that citizens have a reasonable chance of seeing what documents exist.
Public access to documents must be all-embracing and the main and basic principle, but it must naturally be supplemented with certain well-defined exceptions.
Citizens must of course be protected.
The Commission suggested 16 exceptions, which we felt was far too many.
We have therefore reduced them to six.
Justification for a document being classified as confidential must be required in each individual case.
Furthermore, confidentiality may not be assigned permanently.
As soon as confidentiality is no longer justified, the document must naturally be made publicly accessible.
There may, of course, be negotiation strategies whereby a document may need to be kept secret before a meeting, but once decisions have been taken there may no longer be a need to maintain confidentiality.
The document should then be made available.
In addition, it must be possible to appeal against all decisions relating to confidentiality.
It must be possible to appeal to the European Court of Justice, the Ombudsman or the relevant EU authority, and Parliament must always be able to question the grounds for confidentiality.
Another important principle, which has been one of my hobbyhorses since the debate on openness began, is that, as far as possible, documents must be made available in electronic form on the Internet.
This is something that Parliament has supported and will probably also emphasise again today, which is important.
I regard this as a very good example of Swedish and Nordic influence on the system of the EU.
Mr President, I would like to start by thanking the rapporteurs for an excellent piece of work.
Increased openness will reduce bureaucracy and the opportunities for cheating and fraud and, at the same time, increase the legitimacy of the institutions among citizens.
I will not get too bogged down in some of the details of the report - it is always possible to wish for more when it comes to details - but keep to the main principles.
The basic principle of the proposal on our table now is that all documents must be made public.
The exceptions are considerably fewer and clearer than those in the Commission's proposal.
The general public is guaranteed the greatest possible access to documents and in the easiest possible way.
The same thing applies to citizens in third countries.
A register of all documents must be established.
Requests for access will be handled relatively quickly.
Those countries which have better systems will not be adversely affected, but will be able to retain their systems.
Furthermore, a report must be sent to Parliament every year so that we might continually follow up this action.
I would also like to emphasise that all citizens must be guaranteed access to documents in as many forms as possible.
In our group, we have also discussed the possibility that the visually impaired and those with other types of functional disability should be able to receive documents in a form other than written form.
I would like to draw attention to the Internet and other possibilities which in the future may facilitate access to documents.
I would like to conclude by saying that, in Parliament, we must be very unified in supporting this comprehensive proposal, because the problems do not lie with ourselves.
It is now a matter of our producing a proposal and achieving a good result in our negotiations with the Council and the Commission.
That is the most important thing, and that is the task we face.
Mr President, transparency and openness do not appear in a good light in the European Union.
In the eyes of the citizens, the European Union is a cumbersome bureaucracy that spends its time cooking up all manner of regulations behind closed doors.
As a parliamentarian, I can confirm the accuracy of this impression.
The Council of Ministers, in particular, is a sealed fortress.
And the present legislative proposal from the Commission is no cause for celebration either.
Fortunately, this Commission proposal has been heavily adapted by the various parliamentary committees, due in part to the contribution of a number of liberal draftsmen of opinions that have just spoken.
The guiding principle must be that all documents are accessible, subject to certain exceptions.
That is the will of this Parliament.
All in all, the ELDR Group feels that the proposal has been substantially improved on, but that there is still room for improvement nonetheless.
I would point out that the arrangements pertaining to the registration of documents are too complex, the grounds for exceptions could be formulated better, and that non-European EU citizens have a right to openness too.
The stipulations concerning the duty of the Commission and the Council to provide Parliament with information, have no place in this legislative proposal.
The doctrine of political responsibility must not be confused with the citizens' rights to openness.
All in all, I call upon the Social Democrat and Conservative groups, and, of course, the others too, to support our amendments.
Mr President, a word about the position of the European Commission, because I have already talked about the Council.
My group and I have our doubts about the European Commission.
According to reports, this regulation on public access has rarely been discussed in the college, and has been regarded by it up until now as a predominantly official matter.
I am keen to hear what the Commissioner in attendance today thinks about this.
If it were to be the case then it is a miscalculation because this is about the credibility and reliability of the European Union in the eyes of the citizens.
I call upon the Commission to give its full cooperation in delivering a sound regulation based on the principle of public access subject to certain exceptions.
Mr President, Mr Cashman, let there be no mistake, my group also feels that your report is a major step forwards in comparison with the Commission' s report.
There are fewer exceptions and it gives Member States the option of retaining their own national, more far-reaching legislation.
But there are also points of criticism and I would like to highlight one of them.
It relates to the announcement in our report of the so-called 'select committee' , the committee of inquiry.
And just remember, what we are talking about here is a 'select committee' of the European Parliament.
A small group of MEPs who may be able to gain access in the future to secret military documents.
My problem, and that of my group, is that this provision for parliamentarians is incorporated in a provision which should be about accessibility to the public, i.e. to the citizens.
It is totally unacceptable, Mr Cashman, for us to get a good deal out of all this ourselves where access to documents is concerned, but to then leave the citizens out in the cold on that very point.
I would remind you that this is not an imagined danger because Parliament has decided to lodge an appeal against the Solana decision.
But at the same time, it has said that whether or not we go ahead with this case depends on the progress of the negotiations as regards the select committee.
In other words, as I see it, a link has been established - erroneously so - between the rights of parliamentarians and the rights of the public.
I would therefore urge the rapporteurs to delete any reference to the rights of parliamentarians from the provision concerning public access to documents, and I call upon all my fellow delegates to make very sure that their interests are not played off against those of the public.
Mr President, we have talked such a lot in Parliament about bringing the Union closer to the people, and I think then, if this is what we really want, that this project is crucial.
It is a project which may lead to citizens being placed in a position in which they are co-players and active participants and are not just spectators or like pawns in interesting, large-scale games of chess.
I therefore also think it is important that, in this report, we should concentrate on citizens' rights. We should not confuse this issue with every other possible matter connected with the right of access to documents and we should not confuse it with Parliament' s, the Commission' s and the Council' s internal quarrels about access to documents.
It is citizens' rights we are dealing with on this occasion.
I should like to emphasise that we shall, in any case, vote in favour of as broad a definition as we possibly can of what the documents in question are.
There is a multiplicity of documents nowadays, and we should like to ensure that there is a high degree of access to as many different types of document in as many different forms as is humanly possible.
This also means, of course, that, conversely, we want to ensure that the exceptions are as minor and as few in number as they possibly can be.
I simply cannot understand why, in the context of this cooperation, it should be necessary to introduce rules more restrictive than those which individual Member States can live with.
I cannot understand how it can be accepted that citizens of the European Union should have poorer rights of access to documents than citizens in some individual Member States.
I cannot understand why it should be more important or dangerous if something were to be leaked from this 'Community' , as it is called, than if something similar were to be leaked from the Swedish, or possibly Danish, government.
That is why I think it is so crucial that citizens' rights should not be restricted in those Member States where there is at present good access to documentation and why I think that cooperation should instead be used to increase citizens' access in the individual Member States and, indeed, in the European Union as a whole.
If, then, we mean what we say about citizens' rights and bringing the European Union closer to the people, then what is needed are not flashy documents and high-minded speeches but quite specific citizens' rights.
Mr President, on behalf of the Members of the Bonino List, I would like to thank the rapporteur, Mr Cashman for what we consider to be excellent work.
Before focusing on our concern over certain points, I would first like to state that the right of access to information should be recognised as a civil and political right.
Today, as a tool to help us exercise this civil and political right, we have the Internet, a term which has a strange ring within the European institutions and which, although we are starting to make use of it, is not exploited to the full.
The Internet is a remarkable tool, and it is certainly now the simplest, most economical and most easily accessible tool available.
We will therefore vote for the amendments facilitating its use.
Our concerns are threefold: the first is regarding the common foreign and security policy sectors, but also the sectors of justice and home affairs.
Access to documents is not guaranteed in these sectors and is denied not only to the citizens, but even to the European Parliament. Moreover, Parliament is neither kept formally informed nor consulted regarding fundamental documents.
Our second concern stems from the way the Council takes legislative decisions behind closed doors.
The citizens and Members of Parliament are currently denied the right to be aware of the positions adopted by the national delegations within the Council and the way these delegations vote.
If the Council of today is supposed to be a co-legislating organ, a sort of upper House with legislative power, then, logically, the Council's votes and proceedings ought to be made public.
The citizens have to be able to find out how their government has voted on highly important matters.
The third concern relates to the limited access to examination scripts from the Union's recruitment competitions.
There is, in fact, a grey area which leads to incidents of discrimination and poor administration. These incidents have a direct bearing on the quality of the work produced by the institutions.
At the same time, we Members of the Bonino List feel that we must not go too far and introduce extreme regulations allowing indiscriminate access to information or opinions which are of no decision-making import.
Our vote will therefore be targeted at finding the right balance between the two extremes.
Mr President, the Commission' s attitude to the right of access to documents may be seen from the internal handbook sent on 11 October to employees of the Commission to tell them how to deal with requests from MEPs for access to documents.
On 13 October, it was sent to Parliament, but I have only just seen it tonight.
It appears from this document that, if an MEP asks for information as part of the discharge procedure, Mrs De Palacio' s employees must refuse to respond to such requests.
There is only one person - the Chairman of the Committee on Budgetary Control - who is in a position to request information in connection with the discharge procedure.
This internal handbook for employees goes on to state that, if an MEP finds an interesting piece of information in a newspaper and would like to see the document concerned, then there is only one Member of Parliament who can submit such a request, and that is the President of Parliament.
This is scandalous, and it shows what the Commission' s intentions were in connection with the framework agreement.
If not even Members of Parliament can obtain the information they ask for, how for heaven' s sake are ordinary citizens to obtain such information?
All MEPs are therefore justified in going to their groups...
(The President cut the speaker off)
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, transparency ensures greater participation by the citizens in the decision-making process together with greater legitimacy, efficiency and responsibility on the part of the administration in a democratic system.
It is essential and fundamental to the system for the citizens to have the broadest possible access to the EU's documents.
In principle this regulation is positive, especially the clarification that it covers all areas of activity and all the institutions of the Union.
But one serious cause for regret remains.
If it is applied extensively, the list of exceptions in Article 4 could totally destroy the object of this regulation.
The regulation is marked by imprecision, which will produce legal uncertainty for the citizens.
I consider it extremely questionable to deny access to documents where - and I quote from Article 4 - disclosure could undermine "the effective functioning of the institutions".
That provision could open the door wide to arbitrariness.
The concept of the "effective functioning of the institutions" is vague and inconsistent with the case law of the European Court of Justice.
According to that court, the decision on whether to grant access to a document must take account of the relative interests of the institutions, the confidentiality of the document and the interest of the applicant.
The argument that it could undermine the effective functioning of the institutions is not sufficient grounds for the denial of access to documents.
This provision must be deleted or at least supplemented by the obligation to weigh up the various interests.
The purpose of this regulation is to optimise access to documents while adhering as far as possible to the principle of openness.
The proposed regulation can only achieve that aim if the list of exceptions in Article 4 is toned down, to say the least.
Mr President, today the House is debating a very serious and important issue because this debate is about one of the most important legislative texts which we, as a Parliament, are required to examine.
And it is an important legislative document because it concerns the quintessential relations between the man in the street and the institutions, these relations being no more and no less than his facility to access the institutions.
The context of this debate is defined in the proposal made by the European Commission and it is this proposal, via the report by our fellow Member, Mr Cashman, whom I congratulate on his excellent work, which informs the position of the European Parliament.
However, the question which begs to be answered is: what about the Council?
So far, the only proposal to have come out of the Council is the absolute and, in my view, unacceptable position of Mr Solana on issues relating to the common foreign policy.
I call on you to pressure the Council into changing its mind and, at the same time, I call on you to vote in favour of the Cashman report.
Mr President, first of all I should like to thank Mr Cashman for the splendid work he has done on this report.
I think the report sends a powerful signal to all the EU' s institutions and to the general public.
Openness in legislative work and in public administration is, of course, crucial to our democracies being able to function.
It is therefore not enough that a system should be formally open.
It must also be experienced as such.
The Commission' s draft Regulation is in reality reminiscent of Hans Christian Andersen' s story of the Emperor' s New Clothes.
There is a difference between words and deeds.
Here in the European Parliament, we must adopt the role of the little boy in the story.
The usual method of international cooperation, with all the customs and ground rules of diplomacy including the rule that everything must take place behind closed doors, will not do in the modern form of cooperation the EU has developed into.
We must give up this habitual way of thinking.
With relatively few exceptions, documents must be fully accessible to the public.
Otherwise, we shall lose people' s support for European cooperation.
I might also add that, even if the rules in question only affect people in the EU, Mr Cashman' s proposal will also have a knock-on effect in the Member States where it will no longer be possible to keep documents secret on the basis of the standard justification we almost always encounter, namely that it is an EU matter.
This is the attitude behind the poor opinion people have of the EU, an opinion which Mr Cashman' s report will change for the better.
The report is also good for people' s confidence in European cooperation.
I shall just conclude by saying that I think it was a pity that Mr Jens-Peter Bonde had got the wrong script for his intervention today.
It was not, in any case, relevant to the Cashman report.
Mr President, I thank Mr Cashman for his assiduous and inspired work in committee.
Freedom of information and a culture of open and transparent administration are powerful tools for better government and for rooting out corruption and malpractice.
Since it was Mr Prodi who presented proposals to us in January, we had hoped he would be here to reply to this debate.
Indeed the Commission has maintained a curious silence throughout our deliberations, but we look forward to the Commissioner's remarks this morning.
Mr Solana in the Council has made an audacious bid to be crowned the prince of darkness.
But once this report is voted on today, Parliament will stand ready to negotiate with the Commission and the Council a code which will cause citizens to blink in the bright Strasbourg sunshine.
Publication must be our presumption and the onus placed squarely on those who seek to withhold it.
It is grotesque that in the European Union national governments make public policy behind a heavy curtain of secrecy.
The freedom of information act foreseen in Article 255 will rip it asunder.
Mr President, I would like to thank the rapporteur and everyone else involved in this work.
This is a very important report, which forms an important part of what we might call the EU's new principle of public access to official documents.
Included in this, apart from this draft legislation which regulates citizens' right of access to documents, are the framework agreement between the Commission and Parliament and other agreements such as the Solana Decision.
It is now that we have the chance to make the EU more open and more democratic.
It would be an enormous disappointment if we did not succeed with this.
It is a matter of legal security, an efficient administration and effective democracy.
We must remember that this proposal shall establish citizens' right of access to documents without them having to provide a reason for this or to demonstrate that they are affected.
We must not confuse this with the role of the European Parliament or with future interinstitutional agreements.
The Cashman report constitutes an improvement on the Commission's proposal, but in my opinion the improvement is not sufficient.
We still need to vote in favour of many of the amendments that have been tabled, among others by the Group of the Greens and by the Group of the Europe Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party.
The amendment concerning a register is particularly important.
Furthermore, citizens will not need to have their rights interpreted. Instead, they will have the right of access to documents in order to determine for themselves what is important.
Mr President, the report before us points in the right direction. But it should aim further.
The general public is often given the impression today that good information means being swamped with mounds of glossy brochures.
However, people do not measure information by the shiny cover, but by the content, transparency and legibility.
It is true that transparency and openness can help prevent corruption and the waste of resources.
The latest report by the Court of Auditors shows how urgently we need changes here.
Let me turn to three other aspects.
Firstly, democracy is based on the participation of the citizens and is meant to be an incentive to action.
But what if people are not or not adequately informed and then encounter a jungle of provisions through which not even a Member of Parliament, let alone the man in the street, could find their way?
Surely information also implies that the citizens can recognise their own interests in our decisions, for instance in decisions on aid projects and so forth.
Secondly, documents are often couched in the kind of language not even a lawyer can understand, let alone a citizen.
Finally, so many documents are kept secret even from the Members of Parliament that many of the facts we would need in order to reach a decision remain so hidden that...
(Technical disruption)
Mr President, there is no trace of the 'Europe of the citizens' rhetoric that we hear so much about in the restrictive rules governing access to documents proposed by the Commission and the Council.
Do these institutions really want to bring the citizens closer to Europe?
Their attitude would suggest a propensity towards the centralisation of power.
Why did they opt for a regulation?
Surely this is about documents belonging to the institutions?
And why have access exemptions been formulated so broadly?
One thing is for sure, now that unanimity is no longer required in the Council, the only possibility of redressing the balance rests with Parliament.
Fortunately, the Cashman/Maij-Wegen report represents an attempt to compile a document which lays down the citizen' s right to access to documents, and not the right of institutions to impose restrictions.
But Parliament is no stranger to these little power games either.
For example, the report contains amendments about the right of the institutions to classify documents as secret or public. These are amendments that are mainly geared towards increasing our own influence.
But does this subject actually belong in a regulation on the right of the public to have access to documents?
Besides, Parliament' s passion for regulation, as borne out by so many amendments, will result in a regulation that is difficult to implement.
And bear in mind that transparency and openness, which are necessary to guarantee the involvement of the citizens, would be best served by the exact opposite, i.e. a clear and simple regulation.
That is certainly what we as a Parliament should stick to.
Mr President, I would like to thank Mr Cashman for his report, which is enriched by the opinions of Mrs Maij-Weggen, Mrs Hautala, Mrs Malmström, Mrs Theato, Mrs Thors and Mr Andreasen.
However, I think that he is referring to all the institutions except the Council, for the Council is a black hole in the European Union. The Council is the unknown on the far side of beyond.
In my opinion, a step has been taken towards making it possible for citizens to avail themselves of their right to information and knowledge.
In all probability, the advent of electronic data will eventually bring the citizen this possibility, providing information automatically without the citizens having to make an - albeit legitimate - request for it.
Furthermore, I feel that, as the Committee on Petitions and the Ombudsman have requested, we also need to endeavour to outline clearly the institutional and bureaucratic stages in the process, defining the responsibilities which - rightly - still lie with the institutions, therefore without separating the different responsibilities within the organisation.
I have mentioned responsibility precisely because the information has to protect the citizen from errors of public administration.
If this were not so, we would merely be talking about a desire for knowledge, pure and simple.
However, the citizen's right to defend himself against the public administration means that information must be provided.
One last point: information cannot be made available, that is, the right to information, the right to protect the citizen from public maladministration cannot be provided if the procedures are not made simpler and more comprehensible, if the number and complexity of procedures is not reduced, because, although the citizens are familiar with the complex procedures, these procedures are the antithesis of transparency and deny the relationship between the citizen and the institution, which ought to serve as a channel for improving the quality of life of the citizen.
Mr President, first of all warm thanks to the rapporteur Michael Cashman and to all those who have contributed to this report.
Until now, transparency has been little more than a much-misused slogan when applied to the activities of the EU institutions.
The Cashman report with its demands is now a first, valuable step forward, although, in my view, no more than that.
We Members should be more courageous.
We will be setting up an inter-party and interparliamentary European transparency initiative, known in short as ETI.
It will be made up of MEPs, members of national parliaments, but also media representatives, because it is important to defend ourselves jointly against the intolerable habit of secrecy in the EU institutions.
It is not just a matter of the principle of unrestricted access to all documents but also, of course, of finally managing to open the doors of Council meetings, so that in future the Council can no longer take lonely decisions in camera à la Metternich and then go in for cheap 'Brussels bashing' .
The media representatives, in particular, are warmly invited to support our parliamentarians and to work together with us so that we can find out all the things the citizen wants to know and needs to know.
Tomorrow there will be a meeting in London.
We will ask the British Foreign Trade Minister and the Minister for Science to show their understanding for our concern. The weekend after that, the European Council of Artists will be meeting in Madrid and there, too, ETI will feature large on the agenda.
The model for us all is the American Freedom of Information Act and the living practice of transparency in Sweden.
It is not just chance that we have heard almost only Scandinavians speak here, with very few speakers from Germany or Italy and, so far at least, I believe, none from France.
It is fortunate that the Swedes will be taking over the presidency of the Council next year; perhaps they will be able to send out a much clearer signal.
In any case, we need a new age of enlightenment and this is a great opportunity for us MEPs to show our true colours.
Mr President, I would like to thank Mr Cashman for his excellent work.
However, he is not the only one I should like to thank, as my sincere thanks also go to Hanja Maij-Weggen, of the PPE-DE Group, who is the other rapporteur, thanks to the enhanced Hughes Procedure.
I am glad that they have been able to work in close and successful cooperation in this matter.
Transparency and democracy are important values in our work, and they will come about if registers on existing information, including that deemed confidential, are made obligatory.
This is the principle which I have made the starting point in my own report on the accessibility to information on the environment.
It would also be important if the public were given information as to when a document, which is not available to the public at the time a request is made to examine it, because it is incomplete or confidential, will actually be made available.
I would like to focus attention on something which concerns public accessibility to documents which fall within the authority of the Commission or are in the possession of bodies set up by the institutions.
These latter would include, for example, the European Environment Agency in Copenhagen as well as the Food Safety Agency, which is soon to be established.
Naturally, the documents these bodies hold must unambiguously be included within the scope of provisions on accessibility.
I do not think Mr Cashman' s chosen technique here is a good one, however.
It is technically cumbersome to classify these bodies in a separate Annex, as new bodies are forever being created or changed.
It would be better to create provisions in the paragraphs themselves, which would oblige all bodies to publish their documents and create registers on them.
Secondly, I would like to draw attention to the work on derogations.
The provision of derogations is a very delicate matter, and what is otherwise an excellent report and a huge increase in transparency will very easily be overshadowed in the minds of the public by any clumsy set of provisions on derogations.
Naturally we have to finally decide on the sort of practices which would shed public light on the work of the Council, and no set of derogations must be allowed to let the Council retreat behind it in the way it did before.
But it is just as important to temper public opinion, which borders very much on the paranoid as a result of exaggerated secrecy with regard to documents on such matters as security and defence.
In fact, it is important, as far as security is concerned, that the public can judge, using facts and documents, just how much confidence they have in European defence.
Mr President, we are now in a situation in which we can really say that steps are being taken in the direction we have wanted for many years, and the principles of which were agreed in the Treaty of Amsterdam.
Transparency must become a founding pillar of all the work of the European Union, but the right to access documents is still not enough in itself to establish transparency.
We must see to it that the work of all the institutions is based on transparency, clarity and intelligibility, and that means that the decision-making structures are clearly visible.
Bureaucracy has also to be avoided here.
The times being proposed for the release of documents must be absolute deadlines, because in normal circumstances documents are readily available to the public.
I also think it is very important that this report proposes a yearly review as, then, lists of documents that have not been able to be made public, can justifiably be gone through.
At this stage we would also then have the chance to examine, on political grounds, whether the suppression of documents has been judged entirely appropriately.
I hope that this report is received favourably here in Parliament.
Mr President, there is a yawning gap between Parliament' s position and those of the Council and the Commission.
This gap is symbolic of the distance between the European Union and its citizens.
Our people regard Europe as being undemocratic, a place where decisions are taken behind closed doors.
The gap is also becoming a democratic deficit in Europe.
At the end of the day, exchange of information is an essential foundation of modern democracy, which is nurtured by public debate, media and public control and the contribution of social organisations.
Parliament' s proposals bridge this gap.
I would also emphasise that the vast majority of MEPs support the proposals, and that includes delegates whose own countries may be less familiar with the tradition of openness.
I regard this consensus throughout Parliament as a great achievement, enabling us to demonstrate that this has become a Europe-wide fight for European democracy.
I would conclude that the Council committed a serious error in July when it categorically declared all documents about military affairs secret.
This decision illustrates just how far we still have to go before Europe actually has a democratically controlled security and defence policy.
That is why Parliament is calling for European security and defence policy to be embedded in the structures of the European Commission in future.
Firstly, we must tackle the insupportable decision taken by the Council.
Naturally Parliament recognises the need to keep certain military matters secret, but only if this is done on the basis of an assessment of the content of each individual document, and with the aid of verifiable criteria and procedures.
Parliamentary control of secret documents could then take place via a parliamentary select committee.
Mr President, access to documents is fundamentally important to our European democracy.
The Council and the Commission must deliver the goods with interest in the negotiations due to take place in the coming weeks.
Otherwise, the Social Democratic Group, along with others, will endeavour to enforce this right to information by having recourse to the law.
Mr President, I would firstly like to express my satisfaction at being able to explain to you the Commission' s position with regard to the amendments tabled by the various committees on the proposal for a regulation, a regulation which we all consider to be of great importance to the reality of democracy and progress in our society.
I would also like to say how much the Commission and myself appreciate the efforts made by the rapporteur, Mr Cashman, and the draftsperson of the proposal, Mrs Maij-Weggen, to present this report in such a short period of time.
In accordance with Article 255 of the Treaty, the proposed regulation must be adopted before 1 May 2001, that is to say, two years after the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam.
Before presenting the Commission' s position, I would like to point out that, in drawing up its proposal, the Commission based its work, on the one hand, on the experience and functioning of the voluntary code of the last six years and, on the other, on a study of the legislation of the Member States, some of which have a great deal of experience in providing their citizens access to documents.
The Treaty recognises the citizens' right to have access to the documents of the European institutions in accordance with certain principles and conditions.
As the proposal indicates, the Commission feels that providing citizens with access will mean that they are guaranteed better information on decision-making processes, and that administrations will have greater legitimacy, efficiency and responsibility in a democratic system.
The fundamental principle is therefore openness, but this must be reconciled with safeguarding the public interest and respect for certain rights which warrant special protection.
This is the fundamental balance that we must achieve.
Our legislation must also respect another type of balance which is equally essential: the balance between the three institutions that are considered in the Treaty of Amsterdam.
This does not mean that it would not be appropriate for the other institutions also to adopt the regulation when we adopt it.
When President Prodi addressed Parliament on 3 October, he referred to the institutional triangle and stated that, in a European system based on checks and balances, the efficient functioning of each institution contributes to the common interest.
Each of the institutions has a different task to perform and its needs and obligations are therefore different.
As a result of Mr Cashman' s report we now have a clear idea of Parliament' s priorities.
However, the Council' s position with regard to some of the most important provisions of the proposal is still not clear.
This element of uncertainty means that the Commission, at this point in the procedure, can only offer a general position.
We are therefore unable to agree to some of the amendments without prejudging a future negotiation and a definitive position in relation to it.
The Commission is pleased to see that the European Parliament agrees, to a large extent, with its view of many of the aforementioned issues.
Furthermore, other amendments do not present any problems of principle.
We must go further in relation to the ways in which the regulation will be applied and implemented, because openness, transparency and the provision of access to documents is an attitude which must be strengthened in our respective administrations and which must become a reality.
I believe that many of us who are in favour of the maximum degree of transparency, which would allow the institutions to become more efficient, were truly amazed, a few years ago, to discover that, in a country which always sets an example in these areas, certain sterilisation practices had been taking place for several years, specifically in relation to certain categories of citizen, in the most shady and least transparent manner.
I believe that this demonstrates that there are no perfect situations and that we all have to make progress in order to prevent situations of this type.
I now wish to address certain problems that currently prevent the Commission from accepting certain amendments.
One of them is the need to achieve a fair balance between openness and efficiency.
I am referring in particular to texts for internal use and to initial drafts and preparatory study documents for exclusively internal use by the institutions.
All national legislation in this field excludes these documents.
Forcing institutions to publish these internal notes could, in many cases, simply lead to confusion amongst the citizens.
As one Member has said, there is a paradox here, and that is that sometimes the worst type of disinformation results from an overload of information.
In this respect, I believe that access to preparatory documents would not provide much information.
Furthermore, an attitude such as this would discourage creative thinking and would encourage strictly bureaucratic approaches within the institutions.
I believe that this is precisely the opposite of what the institutions intend.
I must acknowledge that the great challenge of this regulation is the precise definition of what documents are.
In this respect, I believe that we must now continue to make progress in seeking a common definition, on which all the institutions can agree.
Therefore, although I cannot agree to the amendments to Articles 3 and 4 today, that is to say Amendments Nos 28 and 30, this does not mean that we do not have to hold discussions and make progress in this regard.
Another problem lies in the treatment of entry documents, that is to say, documents drawn up by third parties.
The institutions lack experience in this field, since the current system only deals with documents presented by the institutions themselves.
The Commission' s proposal on third-party documents takes account of what was agreed at the last Intergovernmental Conference - in Declaration No 35 of the Treaty of Amsterdam, which we cannot ignore - which gives them, both the institutions and the third parties, the final word on whether to publish these documents.
Parliament' s amendments completely reverse this approach and we therefore believe that greater consideration is required and that the proposal for a new Article 4c, Amendment No 36, is not yet sufficiently mature to be accepted favourably by the Commission.
With regard to other amendments, we believe that we need time to assess the consequences of the proposal from the operational point of view and we must ensure that the procedures incorporated are not bureaucratic, but are truly accessible to all the citizens.
I include here amendments such as those tabled on measures which must be agreed by means of an interinstitutional agreement: Amendments Nos 34, 45, and 48.
As I pointed out previously, in certain cases we can agree in principle to the amendments, but we have to work together from a technical and administrative point of view, for example with regard to the amendments referring to the classification of documents and the register.
For several decades the Commission has had a system for the classification of documents.
Therefore the principle that documents should be subject to a classification system does not raise any problems.
Nevertheless, there has been no discussion as to whether or not the rules for classification should be common to all the institutions.
It is premature at this point in the legislative procedure to take a position on whether there should be a direct relationship between classification and access to documents, as proposed in Amendment No 29, or whether rules to this effect should be included in the present regulation.
The relationships established by the amendments between rules on classification and rules on the content of the register therefore prevent us from accepting at this stage Amendment No 46 relating to the register.
I would like to highlight that, at the right time, the Commission could accept practically all the amendments, such as Amendments Nos 9, 18, 21 in part, 23, 25, 26.1, 28(f), 35, 38, 40.1, 40.6, 41.1, 42, 43.1, 47, 49 and 52.
Furthermore, the Commission believes that we will be able to reach agreement, with some modifications, on Amendments Nos 11, 12, 40.4, 40.7, 43.2, 47, 48.4, 50.1 and 50.2.
Perhaps also Amendments Nos 63, 66.2, 73.1, 74.2, the final part of 75, and 78.2.
I would like to highlight the fact that, although the Commission is only able today to express certain global and positive approaches in certain respects, and with regard to other amendments we are making no comment or only doing so cautiously, this does not mean that we do not want to go ahead with the debate, the negotiation and the search for common ground between the three institutions.
We hope to be able to work in this respect so that the appropriate regulation will be approved by May.
Once again, thank you very much to all the rapporteurs for the efforts they have made.
Thank you very much, Commissioner
Mr President, I have a point of order.
We have just heard the Commissioner, Mrs de Palacio, briefly listing dozens of amendments that the Commission can accept and others it recommends that we reject.
Would it not be possible to have that list in writing, since we will be voting in ten minutes' time?
Nobody had time to note down the amendments the Commissioner listed.
I am making this comment because as a rule the Commissioner present gives the Commission' s voting recommendations orally.
We have no written document before us and, in future too, I would like the Commission to inform the Members of its recommendations in writing.
I have to disagree with my colleague, Mr Poos.
It is not for the Commission to tell political groups what decisions they should make on the amendments that have come from the different political groups and therefore the Commissioner should not be placed in this invidious position.
Mr President, I asked for the floor to make the same comment as Mr Poos.
Mr Cashman was right to say that it is not up to the Commission to tell the political groups how they should vote here in plenary.
Yet, there are some Members, including myself, who, on occasion, also trust in the wisdom of the Commission.
Sometimes I would indeed like to vote for the Commission' s proposals and that means that Members really do need a list of the amendments the Commission can in fact support and of the amendments it does not wish to support.
It will be up to Members, who in any case vote according to their hearts and their conscience, to make up their mind on the basis of this Commission list.
Mr President, I would agree with Mr Cashman that the process of parliamentary decision-making is taking place as we speak.
I have also heard from the Commission -which I would sincerely like to thank incidentally, for being so very accommodating, because that much I can say - that it is unable as yet to give a definitive answer on certain aspects.
That is a very important point, of course, and I am sure it will have certain repercussions.
But precisely because the Commission - I see the Commissioner is nodding - is unable to give a definitive answer as yet, it is in fact a little risky to get everything down in black and white at this early stage, because then we will lose control of the situation.
So what I would actually like to ask now, is whether Parliament can pursue its own decision-making process, in a sense independently of the Commission' s position, and then we can explore how the rapporteurs can engage in further consultations with the Commission in order to reach a definitive viewpoint.
That seems to me to be a better order in which to do things.
I have taken cognisance of the opinions expressed here.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place at 12 noon.
Welcome
Own funds of banks
The next item is the report by Mrs Villiers (A5-0282/2000), on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, on the evaluation of Directive 89/299/EEC on the own funds of banks [2000/2207(INI)].
When a bank fails it has wider-reaching implications than a failure of another sort of business because people's savings are jeopardised and the stability of the financial system can be jeopardised.
Therefore, we have special rules to ensure that banks stay solvent and stay afloat and do not fail, and these rules are designed to protect savers and to maintain financial stability.
They are globally agreed in Basel but the current framework is out of date because it requires the same regulatory capital reserves.
The same amount of money needs to be put aside for a wide range of different risks.
This actually encourages banks to opt for higher risks because it means that a bank can go for a higher premium for the same regulatory capital charge.
The Commission's new proposal, the main thrust of which the committee warmly welcomes, is that the lower the risk, the lower the regulatory charge.
That means banks will be encouraged and rewarded for minimising risk and maintaining proper reserves of capital against their liabilities.
We make a number of political demands in our report from the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs.
Firstly, that the new rules take account of the diversity of the banking and investment sector in the European Union.
These rules apply to many thousands of small and large banks and investment firms and must be designed to suit all their needs.
The rules should be as easy as possible for these institutions to use.
We are moving to a more sophisticated system.
It does not need to be a more bureaucratic and complex system.
We, in the committee, cautiously accept the role proposed by the Commission for external ratings, with the reservation that this is a role with limitations - most importantly, small businesses will not need to be rated, nor will businesses without a rating be disadvantaged.
Nevertheless we believe it is important to state that banks' internal credit scoring and internal rating systems must be at the centrepiece of the new framework.
They offer the best way to deliver a risk-sensitive framework over a wide area of the banking sector, as well as to clients and small businesses.
We welcome the enhanced status accorded to credit risk mitigation, particularly the collateral which may be offered by small businesses.
We also accept that, in the long term, there is probably a need for a new charge for other risks, but we make the point that there should be no such charge until there is a sensible method of measuring other risks.
We also accept that there is a need for regulators to have the power to impose particular and additional charges on particular banks.
The new framework puts trust in banks.
We are not allowing them to set their own capital charges but we would be getting suspiciously close to that if we did not keep a close eye on their internal systems.
That is why supervisors need to have these extra powers to impose individual charges, to make sure individual banks are sticking to the rules.
Lastly, and most controversially, the committee strongly called for the use of a fast-track procedure to implement this legislation.
Amendments have been tabled which take a more cautious approach, but what unites us all is the knowledge that the last time there was a Basel Accord, the United States took three months to implement it and the European Union took over three years.
That was not only three years when EU banks were at a severe competitive disadvantage - and there is evidence that they suffered severely - but also three years when European consumers were denied a modern, state-of-the-art regulatory framework.
We need to ask ourselves tough questions as legislators, as to whether we are doing the best for the people who elected us if our regulations and laws are out of date before they hit the statute books.
We must review all our options, including comitology, fast-track and other procedures, because it is dangerous to be regulating yesterday's markets.
That is what we will be doing unless we review our procedures.
What we need to ensure is: that we have legislation which is flexible; that we have a means of implementing it quickly; that we have a means of updating it quickly and easily; that we have a means of ensuring consistency across Member States; and that we have appropriate democratic scrutiny of any new procedures introduced.
I would call on Mr Bolkestein, here today, to put forward proposals, that Parliament can consider, to address these vital needs.
They are vital for the health of the financial services sector in the European Union.
VOTE
(Parliament adopted the resolution)
Report (A5-0321/2000) tabled by Mr Blokland, on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council directive on the incineration of waste [C5-0371/2000 - 1998/0289(COD)]
(Parliament adopted the joint resolution)
Report (A5-0307/2000) by Mrs Figueiredo, on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council decision establishing a programme of Community action to encourage cooperation between Member States to combat social exclusion [COM(2000) 368 - C5-0317/2000 - 2000/0157(COD)]
Figueiredo (GUE/NGL), rapporteur.
(PT) Mr President, I wish to inform the House that the amendments that appear under the name of the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left, which I have tabled in my capacity as rapporteur, are the result of discussions with the Council and the Commission and also have the support of the coordinators of the political groups that are represented in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs.
They result from the need to ease the way of the codecision procedure to which this report is subject, as you all know.
These amendments replace various other proposals in the report that will probably be rejected in the vote and which will then be replaced by the new amendments arising from this consensus
(Parliament adopted the legislative resolution)
Mr President, we have just voted, in the absence of a number of Members, on a declaration on BSE.
Let me say that there is certainly one organ that has been struck by mad cow disease or by Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, and that is the computer controlling the lifts.
We were stuck for ten minutes because, at the time of the vote, out of all the lifts only two were working.
I would like someone to find out what variant of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease has infected our computers.
Mr President, might I ask the Liberal Group - I am also asking in my capacity as one of the co-rapporteurs - to take a slightly more pragmatic approach?
Because they keep going for split voting on so many articles when there is often only one aspect they want to vote against.
So I would be grateful if the Liberals could take a more pragmatic and speedier approach.
Mr President, it is a great shame that neither rapporteur has entered into proper consultation over this.
We are dealing with a very important piece of legislation and with important articles.
We Liberals, along with certain other members of this House, would like to take this opportunity to make it absolutely crystal clear that we are in favour of improving this openness regulation.
So I am sorry there has not been enough consultation.
We want to show how we uphold the interests of the citizens in this Chamber.
Mr President, in the light of the excellent vote of support for this report and given the Commission's response this morning, it is obvious - if you look at all the parts we have voted on - that under Rule 69(2) we should postpone the vote on the draft legislative resolution in order to allow us to enter into fruitful negotiations with the Commission and the Council.
I hope the House will support that proposal.
(Parliament decided to postpone the vote)
Mr President, I understand that there is now no possibility of voting on the Theorin and Smet reports.
I would therefore like to recommend that the vote on these reports be postponed until the November II part-session.
I also put to the vote Mrs Theorin's proposal to postpone the vote to the November II part-session.
Mr President, the Theorin and Smet reports were debated late yesterday evening, and the intention was that we should vote on them now.
The Group of the European People's Party and European Democrats has presented to me the same request that I have just expressed, that is, that we postpone the vote on these reports until the November II part-session and not vote on them this evening.
The majority of the women will be travelling to a conference of Members of Parliament in Berlin.
It is therefore a joint request from the Group of the European People's Party and European Democrats and the Group of the Party of European Socialists to postpone the vote until November II.
Mr President, let me make one thing clear. The EPP Group did not itself ask but was asked to postpone this.
I personally said that I could agree to that. But there are many other views in our group.
I could agree to postponement under one condition, namely if Mrs Theorin used the time up to November II to improve her report, for as it stands our group cannot endorse it.
I want to make one thing quite clear, and it is a point of principle. If we do not manage to complete the voting by Thursday lunchtime, then the normal procedure is for us to continue voting on Thursday evening.
It is not in order for us to postpone the vote because some colleagues cannot be here in the evening.
So, to put it in a nutshell: on behalf of my group I would agree to postpone it to November II, if Mrs Theorin states that she will continue to work on her report and to improve it.
(Applause from the PPE-DE Group)
As far as the second point is concerned - namely that the votes will take place in the afternoon - I think that we are all aware of this and that we should be present.
Mr President, I apologise for saying that the Group of the European People's Party and European Democrats had also requested that the vote be postponed, but your coordinator in actual fact came to me and said that you also wished to postpone the issue until the November II part-session instead of taking the vote this evening.
Mr Poettering, we have worked together with your people, and the Group of the European People's Party and European Democrats and the Group of the Party of European Socialists have agreed on how the report should look.
We were united on the central issues and came to an agreement in the negotiations.
I submit to what Parliament wants to do, but it is, nevertheless, a matter of an agreement between the Group of the European People's Party and European Democrats and the Group of the Party of European Socialists, concerning both my report and the central issues it contains.
I must say, therefore, that I am very surprised by this.
(Parliament decided to postpone the vote)
Mr President, the vote on Mrs Villiers' report is also on the agenda.
It so happens that the report has not yet been debated, and will not be until after the voting this evening.
Mrs Villiers' report deserves better than to be voted on tomorrow morning.
I therefore move that we postpone the vote on the Villiers report until the November II part-session.
The vote is scheduled to take place tomorrow. However, tomorrow, it will be possible to request that it be postponed.
For the time being it will remain on tomorrow's agenda since the debate has not yet taken place.
Mr President, I am totally opposed to what is happening here in Parliament.
More and more often, over the past few part-sessions, steps have been taken to try to postpone votes scheduled for the five days of our part-session for reasons relating to personal problems, attendance, etc.
I think our Parliament brings discredit upon itself by taking decisions of that kind.
Mr President, unlike Mrs Theorin, I do not suggest moving votes and debates to suit my own personal agenda.
I will indeed be here to debate my report this afternoon and I will be here when it is scheduled to be voted on tomorrow.
The reason why I would suggest that we postpone the vote is because - as Mr Goebbels has said - it is a very important issue.
Not only does it raise the financial services issue, it could have far-reaching implications in terms of our procedure, in terms of the codecision procedure and in terms of our relationship with the Commission.
That is a vote at which colleagues should be present.
I would strongly urge that the vote be postponed until the Brussels part-session.
Motion for a joint resolution on the third Asia-Europe Meeting
(Parliament adopted the resolution)
Mr President, on a point of order, I just wanted to say that I too have an important report on this agenda.
It will be debated and voted on tomorrow, and I am very grateful and proud that this is to happen on a Friday!
Mr President, a vote has just been taken in favour of postponing my report.
I will go along with this, but had you gone down the list in the right order and not had the vote on the Cashman report first, because a number of people are absent this evening - for that is the reason - then there would still have been time to vote on the Smet report.
I followed the order established by the sessional services and the House did not make any changes.
Otherwise I would have been very happy to do so.
Mr President, I find, somewhat to my consternation, that the vote on the report I was to present in plenary and which is on this morning' s agenda has been postponed inadvertently without anyone noticing.
I understand that it is not easy, but changes to the agenda are something we need to be notified of.
As a rule I am always here on Thursdays. This afternoon, however, I have to give a talk.
So I will not be here for the votes this afternoon because I was not warned in time.
I am one of those Members who attends sittings quite faithfully.
I too would move that the vote be postponed to the November II part-session.
First, however, there is just one point I would like to add.
This morning we witnessed a moment of particularly extreme parliamentary idiocy.
I do not know how much roll-call votes cost, but no doubt it comes to hundreds of thousands of French francs, or Belgian francs, out of our budget.
Just to please some people, under ludicrous conditions, we have wasted time and money.
Mr President, I feel you should refer the matter to the Conference of Presidents, so that excessive numbers of requests for split votes or roll-call votes can be identified and perhaps roll-call votes can even be restricted.
All this is out of order and Parliament made itself look ridiculous this morning.
Mr Rocard, I can assure you that this matter will be brought to the attention of the Conference of Presidents.
With regard to the list of votes, the President cannot change the order of the list.
Where necessary, it is the House which decides to make any changes. My role is simply to put one point to the vote after another.
Mr President, on a point of order.
Michel Rocard is quite right. What is happening here is that a very few people are trying to take the opportunity yet again to put forward their interests, which they did not manage to get through in committee.
They then see to it that we have to hold roll-call votes, which in fact are no longer really roll-call votes.
This is a deliberate attempt by a very few people to raise their profile at the expense of others.
So, first of all, we need a sensible system for roll-call votes.
Secondly, we cannot accept the fact that after what I regard as a classic mistaken decision by Parliament to abolish Friday sittings, the very same people who once said they no longer wanted Friday sittings are now protesting!
My question is: have there meanwhile been objections to Parliament's decision to scrap Friday?
Have there been any legal objections?
What will things look like next year?
In future we might even end up in the same situation as now, where we keep having to postpone reports to the Brussels part-session instead of dealing with them here in Strasbourg.
Can you give us any information on the matter?
Mr Mann, your first comment will naturally be brought to the attention of the Parliamentary Bureau and the Conference of Presidents.
As President on duty today, I have to tell you that, as your fellow Member, all I can say is that I agree with you.
I am afraid that we will have to set about changing the Rules of Procedure.
With regard to Friday, there do not appear to have been any further developments, and in any case, this will also be brought to the attention of the Conference of Presidents.
Resolution on BSE (B5-0880/2000)
Mr President, I should like to give an explanation of vote on the BSE feed resolution.
I voted against whole herd slaughter because I do not believe it is the best way to eradicate BSE.
I have heard that there are some farmers who, rather than report they have an animal with BSE, shoot that animal and bury it.
I know that in France they have had whole herd slaughter and this does not seem to be the best way forward.
Even the Scientific Steering Committee says it is not necessarily the most effective, and feed cohort slaughter - which we have in Britain - is effective.
I also voted against Amendment No 7 because I do not believe it is possible, but I did vote for the resolution as a whole, especially the ban on the mammalian meat-and-bone meal feed for all farm animals, as we have had in the UK since 1996.
I voted for the resolution because we have to have strong rules applicable across the EU.
Mr President, I voted for the report on our great Parliament's initiative on the serious crisis in we which find ourselves due to the spread of this epidemic amongst cattle.
I would like to point out that my intention in voting for the motion was, inter alia, to support point 7 of the report.
Indeed, I hope and call for an analysis to be carried out immediately of all the cattle carcasses which have been placed on the market in butchers' shops throughout the European Union, in order to discover whether they are infected with BSE (bovine spongiform encephalopathy).
A check must be carried out on all the carcasses immediately, whatever the cost, for otherwise beef and veal sales will fall below zero.
.
(EL) The Commission and the Council of the European Union have a great deal to answer for as regards the proportions which the issue of BSE has assumed.
Apart from the negativity which they demonstrated during the first stage, when the European Parliament called attention to the risks in Great Britain, action during the second stage, when the crisis was at its height in Great Britain, was basically limited to that country, and there was no immediate programme of strict controls or attempt to restructure animal feedingstuffs at pan-European level.
Cases of BSE have been identified in France because it was the only country in the European Union which took the initiative to apply a system of extensive controls.
Today, complete uncertainty reigns in a climate of anxiety as to the risks in store, and neither consumers nor government authorities have any information on them.
We must immediately:
take measures at pan-European level,
introduce extensive and strict controls on all European Union herds and imports,
remove meat-and-bone meal from animal feedingstuffs, not just for cattle and sheep but also for pigs, poultry and fish,
take measures, by completely restructuring animal feedingstuffs, to ensure that genetically modified soya flour from the USA, Brazil and elsewhere cannot infiltrate the system until scientists have given a full guarantee, which they have yet to do.
Yesterday' s debate in this Chamber on mad cow disease and the safety of animal feed displayed, above all, the extreme confusion in regard to the allocation of responsibilities and in people' s minds.
At present, responsibility is shared between the Community, which has already laid down some partial rules (the ban on feeding meat-and-bone meal to ruminants, rules on the heat/pressure method for producing meal, the compulsory removal of specific 'at risk material' ) and the States, which want to retain their right to enact measures appropriate to their own situation, together with their right to protect themselves and to react rapidly for public health reasons.
The confusion that already exists in this context is exacerbated by a twofold difficulty.
First, there is the difficulty of further standardisation with a view to introducing tighter controls, because some countries, such as Germany, do not want to pass on the extra costs to their farmers given that they are hardly affected by this disease.
Secondly, and, conversely, there is the difficulty of applying different national rules, for now that border controls have more or less disappeared and labelling does not mention the country of origin, there is a significant risk of eating pork from pigs fed on meat-and-bone meal, even in a country where this is banned.
We have now reached the pinnacle of confusion, as became abundantly clear from yesterday' s statements by the French minister, Mr Patriat, and the European Commissioner, Mr Byrne, who both seem to be completely at a loss.
This situation shows how irresponsibly the unification of the internal market has been pursued in recent years.
The first step we need to take is to start again from scratch, to review the labelling rules, to restore certain national controls, to create others and always to set out carefully, and in a clear and practicable manner, minimum European rules, while giving each State the essential right either to go further or to take safeguard measures.
If we do not begin by clarifying responsibilities, rationalising and recognising the overriding right of nations, Europe will merely continue, as today, to play its sad part in watering down these responsibilities.
Turning to the substance of the matter, my group recommended extremely stringent measures to fight this epidemic.
But we must not stop there. It is all very well to put out fires, but it would be even better to prevent them breaking out.
That is why we want to learn four major lessons which should be borne in mind for the future.
The first lesson is that we must reject production methods that go against nature, that are doomed to lead sooner or later to tragedies of this sort.
Perhaps quality farming is a little more expensive, but the apparent savings gained by farming geared to productivity in fact end up as terrible costs for society as a whole.
In that respect, we are appalled to see that the Commission is doing all it can to re-authorise GMOs, at a time when we still have no real idea of their effects and they are liable, 10 or 20 years' hence, to cause new tragedies along the lines of mad cow disease.
Lesson number two: quality farming, which ensures a certain independence in regard to food, cannot survive in Europe in the context of a global free market.
Yet at this very moment, after Seattle, we feel that Commissioner Lamy is just itching to start up a new round of international trade negotiations, to include agriculture, with the intention of once again bringing about a fresh alignment with the world market.
That is unacceptable.
Lesson number three: the Member States must keep a closer eye on the Commission during international negotiations to prevent any further false moves - or should I have said betrayals? - such as the Blair House and Marrakech agreements, which, by cutting down on our vegetable protein products for the benefit of the Americans, drove us to respond by developing the meat-and-bone meal production that lies at the root of our current problems.
We believe that, instead of giving the Commission even greater powers in international negotiations, as is currently proposed, the future treaty of Nice should subject the Commission to closer scrutiny by the national governments and parliaments.
Lesson number four: we must radically review the policy of totally abolishing internal border controls, since it encourages trafficking of all kinds and makes health and safety controls more difficult.
Similarly, we should temper the dogma of free movement at all costs, which led the Commission to threaten those States that wanted to introduce an embargo on British beef in 1996 and to drag France before the Court of Justice in 1999 for having refused to lift that embargo.
Despite all that is happening today, the Commission has the audacity to uphold its complaint, thereby showing the extent to which it regards the free movement of products as the ultimate dogma.
If the Member States want to put an end to these aberrations, they will have to take the treaty of Nice as an opportunity to clearly re-establish a national right of protection for reasons of public health.
. (FR) We voted for this resolution even though it is very belated and even though we distrust some of the ambiguous wording in it.
We condemn the delay in the total and general ban on the production and use of meat-and-bone meal, given that we have known for ten years that it is responsible for the spread of BSE.
Moreover, the ambiguous wording of Paragraph 4 is bound to raise questions about the resolve of the authorities to oppose, by all possible means, the fraud and swindling of the agri-food trusts, when it would have been so much simpler to say in a few words that the production and use of meat-and-bone meal are totally forbidden.
- (FR) We voted in favour of this joint resolution.
We are in a crisis situation, but we are not facing just a beef crisis.
In fact, we are up against a real public health problem and an economic crisis.
It concerns all the stages from 'farm to table' .
The consumers have lost confidence, and to contain the situation it was essential for us to reiterate our call for the rapid introduction of compulsory tests to identify BSE for all bovine animals.
This measure had to go hand in hand with an immediate ban on the use of meat-and-bone meal for all species, throughout the Community.
That is certainly a practical way of applying the precautionary principle.
We have been waiting for far too long.
The Union as a whole must be involved, for it is unacceptable to have one country taking draconian measures and putting its economy at risk while others carry on business as usual.
Moreover, we are still, unfortunately, seeing many cases of fraud and the only way to put a stop to that is to ban meat-and-bone meal throughout the Community.
These are the kind of measures that will reassure the citizens and that will send the farmers the message of solidarity we want to convey to them.
The European Parliament must exert pressure on the Commission, which was overly cautious in the proposals it made during the debate.
We are astounded that the Commission does not seem to realise the scale of the problem.
Finally, this unprecedented crisis emphasises the limitations of the common agricultural policy, which we have seen for many years now.
Today we must help farmers not to increase their production, but to improve it.
There too, we have been waiting for far too long.
Some people are concerned about the emergence of genetically modified products to replace meat-and-bone meal.
A radical change of course in the CAP, which has now become vital, towards growing vegetable crops on fields hitherto left fallow could prevent people from resorting to massive imports of GMOs from the United States.
The CAP must make public health its top priority.
. (PT) The growing number of cases in Britain of new variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease and the current situation in France have placed the 'mad cow' or BSE issue even more firmly on the agenda.
This affair has been characterised throughout by a lack of transparency and an extremely serious covering up of information at the highest level in some Member States of the European Union.
What is at risk here is food safety, from the 'mad cow' issue, from dioxins and even from GMOs.
All of this makes it clear that when the quest for maximum profit is the sole consideration, human and animal health are threatened.
The lack of consumer confidence is spreading and the agricultural markets are battening down the hatches.
Unless there is a change in the common agricultural policy, the food safety problem will only get worse.
The CAP has always promoted intensive production, the gradual 'stepping up' of production and land concentration, which has basically served the interests of the agro-food industry and the big transnational food companies.
The basic problem will not be solved simply by having a European food authority and belated one-off legislative measures, however positive they may be, such as the ban on meat meal in all animal feedingstuffs.
It is crucial that we go further and promote a change in the common agricultural policy.
The recent cases of bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) are, I am afraid, condemning confirmation of the Union's delays in tackling food safety, delays which are even more to be condemned if we consider that the use of meat-and-bone meal in feedingstuffs has been considered dangerous for some time - it was condemned by this House a long time ago - and yet no measures have been taken.
It is therefore necessary to establish as soon as possible the procedures to prevent the use of anatomical parts liable to lead to the transmission of the virus.
The Commission's proposals contained in the White Paper on food safety and, in particular, the establishment of the authority which is to guarantee this safety, must be implemented as soon as possible - over a year has passed and the authority is not yet operative - in order to avoid the confusion of actions carried out by the governments on the subject causing damage such as that which we are witnessing now.
The damage is extremely serious in that it affects two strictly related areas: human health, on the one hand, and, on the other, the health of the cattle species and, consequently, the economy of the zootechnical sector.
We should remember that Europe banned France from continuing to enforce the embargo on beef and veal from the United Kingdom and that the lack of measures has allowed the epidemic now to spread to France.
It is, nevertheless, necessary for the Commission to ban the use of meat-and-bone meal henceforth and to provide for - as far as is known - safer procedures to destroy the parts considered dangerous such as the brain and bone marrow.
Until we are given more information by the scientific bodies, it would be appropriate to destroy the cattle carcasses as well to provide the highest possible guarantee of the protection of human health.
The cases of BSE which have arisen in France, in the same way as the dioxins in chickens issue in Belgium, are the latest in a long series of irresponsible incidents.
For fear of spreading panic among the citizens or with a view to avoiding commercial disasters, certain governments did not provide the Commission with the necessary information quickly enough or did not immediately call a halt to consumption of the products in question or ban their export at the first signs of danger.
These irresponsible attitudes must be strongly condemned and, to avoid these incidents reoccurring, appropriate regulations must be established for all the States of the Union.
It is unthinkable that we should be trying to run a single market without common rules for such a major sector as that of public health.
In the face of these uncertainties, the citizens' reaction is, rightly, one of fear and the refusal to consume those products which are suspected of being dangerous for health.
This attitude is combined with lack of confidence in the European Union, which appears to the citizens not to be able to guarantee the safety of the foodstuffs on the market.
To restore the confidence of the citizens as well as protect their health, it is vital that the Union speeds up its decision-making, defining common rules on the matter and placing the scientific and control bodies in operation as soon as possible to monitor food safety.
The ban on the use of meat-and-bone meal for feedingstuffs is only the first step along this road.
. (FR) Meat eaters are starting to be overcome by paranoia, regardless of whether the meat is produced by traditional, high-quality production processes, which do not use meat-and-bone meal.
The constraints some producers, especially in France, have imposed on themselves to guarantee the quality and traceability of their products may already have been compromised by the loss of consumer confidence, not only in the products but also in measures to guarantee their safety, since products labelled AOC, IGP, etc. are also affected.
We cannot allow an entire industry to be destroyed.
We must tighten up our health and safety controls, impose a procedure for systematic BSE testing, and ban the use of proteins derived from animals.
That is where Europe can assume its legitimate role in full and where it must play its rightful part.
Any efforts the Member States make will remain fruitless unless the same requirements are imposed on imported products from the European Union and from third countries.
Today we have to ban the use of meat-and-bone meal in animal feed, given that we cannot guarantee the traceability of the inputs, but this raises a number of problems.
Should we burn them or store them?
Provided we set up specialised facilities to control the impact of this on the environment.
Should we replace them?
For the time being with oilseed imports, even though we cannot distinguish between imports that have or have not come from genetically modified varieties.
It is crucial to resume the negotiations in the WTO so as to enable European farmers to increase their production of vegetable-based proteins.
The farmers cannot tackle this crisis without help: we need to draw up a support plan for stock-farmers and introduce measures to restore consumer confidence.
Moreover, the politicians must fulfil their responsibility for dealing with the human situations these difficulties have produced.
The time has come for a global debate.
The discussion of the White Paper on food safety is an opportunity to do so.
Let us grasp it.
. (FR) Yesterday' s debate on mad cow disease was an exemplary one in many respects.
Let me point to the key role the UEN Group, and also the very coherent draft resolution we tabled, played in ensuring that it took place.
We finally agreed to co-sign the joint draft resolution and we are delighted it was adopted by a very large majority, despite its inadequacies and weaknesses.
At the same time, we keenly regret that the amendments our group tabled were not adopted.
We consider it crucial, however, for the Community budget to help implement the new safety measures imposed on stock-farmers, and especially on all those working in the beef sector who are hard hit by the loss of consumer confidence.
It is equally crucial to demand the immediate resumption, in the framework of the WTO, of the talks on the provisions of the Marrakech agreement relating to oilseed, an agreement which goes very much against European producers, so as to prevent the ban on meat-and-bone meal from resulting in mass imports of oilseed that may contain genetically modified organisms.
Above all, yesterday' s debate highlighted the differences of opinion on how to deal with the crisis: differences between Member States, differences of political approach, differences between the Community institutions.
There are deep-seated differences on the question of meat-and-bone meal and also on the subject of tests.
So we are now facing an absolutely fundamental safety problem affecting the public health of our peoples and the very future of an entire industry that plays a decisive role in the social balance in some of our Member States.
In the face of this crisis, we cannot therefore confine ourselves to half-measures or to compromise provisions, i.e. to options that are totally inappropriate when what we should be doing is applying the precautionary principle by taking the relevant measures to ensure the maximum safety of our peoples.
The debate has shown that the Council Presidency and the Commission are very much at sea on this issue.
It was rather pathetic to see the Council Presidency try to pass the buck by putting its salvation in the hands of the future European Food Safety 'Authority' , as though the fact that it was European were in itself a guarantee of absolute trustworthiness.
The accusations flying around on all sides in yesterday' s debate - 'The Council is to blame!'
'The Member States are to blame!'
'The Commission is to blame!' - show the extent to which the Community machinery actually works rather like a system for the reciprocal denial of responsibility, at the expense of the sole purpose of the debate: the effective protection of the public health of our people.
For its part, the Commission had to note the wide divergence of views on the remedies needed to contain the crisis.
It decided it was a good idea to pour derision on the protective measures adopted by some Member States, in particular with its reference to 'magic' in regard to the total ban on meat-and-bone meal.
While denouncing the lax approach taken by some Member States, it certainly did not point out its own reluctance to drag France before the Court of Justice because it quite appropriately decided to maintain its embargo on British beef.
The Commission is clearly envisaging no more than half-way measures, which will take away from and not add to the countries with the most stringent safety, whereas, in line with the principle of subsidiarity, it should be giving Member States back the freedom of action they need to protect their people effectively, to ensure their safety, taking account of public opinion in their country, the political resolve there, the scale of the epidemic in their country and the place of the sectors involved in that country' s economy and their society.
Because of the inability of all the European institutions, the Council, the Commission and Parliament, to define an appropriate Community policy that responds to the safety needs of the Member States most directly concerned, problems will arise in deciding whether it is the constraints of the single market or the health and safety needs of our people that come first.
How, indeed, can we restore consumer confidence in France and prevent the collapse of the sectors linked to stock-farming if, on the one hand, we put a total ban on the use of meat-and-bone meal by French farmers while at the same time authorising imports of meat from Member States that continue to feed their animals with meat-and-bone meal and refuse to carry out tests?
We must strictly respect the wishes of those Member States that intend to put food safety and consumer health above all other concerns, their resolve to give priority to scientifically based decisions and to the precautionary principle in regard to any measures they take, while choosing the middle road between the positions of the various partners, and especially those who are most lax.
Otherwise it would become quite clear that the conduct of Community bodies is not being guided by the principle of subsidiarity.
Blokland report (A5-0321/2000)
Mr President, as we are all aware, the fight against air pollution is an extremely important issue.
The main source of air pollution is the large manufacturing companies, as in the case of waste incineration, which is a result of the waste produced in other daily industrial activities and other common daily activities of the European citizens.
I voted for this directive but I would like to stress that, in doing so, I am calling upon the European Union to commit itself and concern itself, rightly, with those who breathe the toxic air produced by these industrial activities. It must also - and even more so - concern itself with those who work in these sectors.
I feel that it would be appropriate to reduce the working hours of the people who work in pollutant companies.
For if these companies pollute the air outside, I hate to think about the state of the air inside the factories!
. (FR) We have now reached the end of a long process leading to the adoption of a Directive on the incineration of waste.
The Commission proposal goes back to 1998, but, because of the many points of disagreement between Parliament and the Council, the Conciliation Committee had to be convened on 11 October.
So today we are deciding on the text that has emerged from the conciliation procedure.
Let me remind you that the directive covers the incineration and co-incineration of waste.
These two treatment methods must form part of a global strategy that covers the prevention, re-use and recycling of waste, a strategy that is coordinated at European level.
In the course of the debates that marked the two readings by the European Parliament, I expressed my doubts and fears about lumping hazardous and non-hazardous waste together in the same directive.
These are very legitimate concerns and they have led Parliament to be very vigilant and to table amendments aimed at establishing very stringent controls over everything connected with the process of incineration and co-incineration.
After extensive discussion with the Council, we achieved what we wanted on several points.
On co-incineration, for example, which is generally carried out in cement kilns, the limit values for emissions are specified in an annex.
However, if more than 40% of the waste incinerated in plants of this kind consists of toxic waste or untreated, mixed municipal waste, the plant will have to comply with the more stringent standards of another annex on incineration.
The European Commission wanted to exclude vegetable agricultural waste and waste from the forestry and food industry.
At second reading, Parliament added fibrous waste from the production of raw pulp and pulp-based paper where this waste is intended for co-incineration.
It managed to get this point through during the conciliation procedure.
Parliament also succeeded with another point: plants in which radioactive waste is incinerated must be expressly excluded from the scope of the directive.
Parliament also succeeded in obtaining stricter rules on the operation of incineration plants, together with improved public access to information.
I will conclude by emphasising once again that the widespread treatment of hazardous waste must not lead us to tolerate the production of such waste.
Our priority is and must remain to prevent the production of waste, in accordance with the line adopted in the European Union' s strategy in this field.
. There is a serious concern within the European Union that not enough is being done to implement new waste management proposals.
The 370 million citizens of the EU are demanding action on this subject and they are right to do so.
Waste in Europe is being generated at a rate of over 1kg per person per day.
Two billion tonnes of waste is being generated within the EU on an annual basis.
This situation cannot continue for ever.
The European Union must be clear about one aspect to solving waste disposal problems.
The future of waste disposal does not lie in local authorities up and down the length and breadth of the European Union searching for new landfill sites.
There is serious growing concern about the actual environmental consequences of landfill sites in general.
I share this concern.
I believe that nothing less then a major shift from reliance on landfill sites to more integrated waste management plans will suffice.
The European Parliament has been to the forefront in devising new waste management strategies in recent years.
I support the objective of the directive which we are discussing here today which is to reduce the adverse effects of incineration on the environment and on human health by considerably reducing the emission levels into the air of several major pollutants.
This is also part of broader European Union environmental policies which are designed to reduce the use of pollutants across all economic sectors in Europe, in accordance with obligations laid down by the Kyoto Accord.
The European Union fully supports the strict, ambitious but attainable recycling and recovery targets that have been laid down by the Irish Government.
These targets which are to be achieved over the next 15 years include the following: a divergence of 50% of overall household waste from landfill sites; a minimum 65% reduction in bio-degradable waste which is presently consigned to landfill sites; the development of waste recovery facilities employing environmentally beneficial technologies capable of treating up to 300,000 tonnes of bio-degradable waste per annum.
All these measures reflect changing public opinions on the issue of waste management.
The days of landfill sites are now coming to an end and must be replaced by more environmentally beneficial technologies.
Figueiredo report (A5-0307/2000)
Mr President, I voted for the Figuereido report on the eradication of social exclusion and poverty, to quote the actual text of the report.
However, I am amazed and extremely disappointed at many of the votes cast regarding some of the amendments.
I am absolutely convinced that 99% of the responsibility for social exclusion and poverty lies with the governments of our 15 States.
In the past, they have all vied with each other to increase social exclusion and poverty and they are continuing to do so now.
If indeed, for example, pensions were less inadequate in terms of the standard of living they allow, there would be fewer poor people.
Group of the European People's Party, why did you vote against the Fatuzzo amendment - tabled by myself - which stated that poverty is also one of the causes of low pensions?
I am extremely disappointed and I hope that you will vote differently next time.
. (EL) The report by Mrs Figueiredo could make a very valuable contribution to the fight against social exclusion by developing cooperation between Member States along these lines.
The Council should therefore ensure that:
funding for the programme is substantially increased,
a chart of specific targets is incorporated into national programmes,
all related policies are adjusted in a bid to integrate social groups with special needs,
new forms of exclusion are included, such as exclusion from the information society,
social agencies, especially representatives of the vulnerable groups targeted by the programme, are involved in the procedures,
the programme is spearheaded by measures to help child poverty, women and the elderly,
a network is established at European level to record, develop, promote and adjust the programme to combat social exclusion.
. (FR) We abstained on this report, even the amended version.
The main reason we did not vote against it is because its author set out a few good intentions.
Unfortunately, however, good intentions do not make a policy, even one of condemnation.
The official count is 65 million poor in Europe, or 18% of the population.
That means that a considerable proportion of the working class of one of the richest regions in the world is reduced to poverty.
This figure of 65 million poor is not the effect of some misfortune that has come out of the blue; it is the result of the greed of a privileged capitalist class intent on boosting company profits and stock exchange rates, which therefore makes people redundant, closes down factories, reducing 15 million women and men to unemployment, and puts such pressure on all wages that the lowest wages are not enough to live on.
The report proposes a budget of EUR 100 million over five years to combat poverty.
That comes to one and a half euros for every poor European.
Even as a handout that would be derisory, quite apart from the fact that the issue of poverty does not call for charity.
We realise that no report and no vote, even by the European Parliament, can alter this situation.
Yet the report could at least have put the blame at the door of those responsible.
In any case, though we did not vote against the report, we did not feel able to vote in favour of it either, because not only are its practical proposals inadequate but, alas, it conceals rather than combats the actual situation, namely the exploitation that is the real cause of poverty among the working classes.
. (FR) This programme to combat social exclusion is one of the priorities of the French Presidency, which has made the social Europe the leitmotif of its proposals.
Let me remind you that Lisbon defined a common strategy of social inclusion.
I welcome this initiative, which responds to the expectations of our fellow citizens, the citizens of Europe.
Indeed, while we welcome the return to growth and the fall in unemployment, we must not close our eyes to the fact that inequalities are still with us, if not getting worse.
Social exclusion is a very real phenomenon, as the Eurostat statistics show: some 18% of the population of the European Union lives on less than 60% of the average national income - this is the low-income threshold taken to measure relative poverty - which means that 65 million people live on low incomes.
Even though the unemployment rate has fallen, there are still 16 million unemployed in the European Union.
Moreover, although unemployment is still the main factor behind poverty and exclusion, job insecurity and low pay are nonetheless obstacles to full integration into society.
Too many of our fellow-citizens are left by the wayside.
We must therefore adopt proactive measures to provide social protection and access to public services in the field of health, education, housing and so on.
I unreservedly support the proposal to implement a second Luxembourg process to deal with social exclusion, containing guidelines and national action programmes.
Indeed, we can see all the benefits of this method in the employment field.
The Lisbon European Council set the European Union the objective of becoming a knowledge-based, competitive and inclusive society.
That can be achieved only at the cost of considerable efforts to guarantee all men and women access to training in the new information and communication technologies and also to the new telecommunications networks.
Universal service has a prime role to play in this regard.
The next meeting point is Nice where, I hope, the Member States will send out a powerful message indicative of their political resolve to embark on a global strategy to strengthen the European social model by adopting the Social Agenda and the Charter of Fundamental Rights.
The primary purpose of the report is to support a programme of Community action to encourage cooperation between Member States of the EU to combat social exclusion.
I believe that the establishment of such a programme of community action is both wise and can be very helpful.
We do not want to build a two-tier Europe, a Europe of the haves and have-nots.
We do not want to accentuate the gap between the rich and poor.
The fact of the matter is that long-term unemployment and youth unemployment are quite concentrated in particular areas within the European Union.
They are concentrated in specific black spots within many rural and urban parts of the European Union.
Devising initiatives to defeat the problems of social exclusion and to give hope and opportunities to the disadvantaged in our society must be a central core policy of all governments within the EU at this time.
The principles underpinning this programme are to create an open method of coordination between Member States to help eradicate poverty and social exclusion.
This will be achieved by setting specific objectives to be integrated into national action plans and implementing policies to promote equal opportunities.
I believe that the rapporteur is right when he calls for greater participation of public authorities, social partners and civil society in measures to defeat poverty and social exclusion at this time.
As a result of the Amsterdam Treaty, all governments within the EU must send new action plans on employment to the European Commission for its evaluation and consideration.
The European Commission must evaluate all these plans to see how successful the governments of the EU are in defeating social exclusion.
We must learn from each other on this specific matter.
Otherwise the gap between rich and poor will widen within the EU.
In this context, I welcome the key provisions of the Social Policy Agenda Programme 2000-2005 as recently published by the European Commission.
This will give an increased role to EU social partners in terms of the drafting of different EU directives and regulations.
Employer relations will be improved.
There will be continued national and European support for local job creation programmes.
There will also be an improved coordination of policy programmes in the area of the information society, modern telecommunication services and Internet related activities.
Ireland has quite an advanced system of social and employment rights and many EU directives are being drafted, particularly on the Irish model in the field of social partnership and employee/employer relations.
- (FR) There is 18% of the population of Europe, or 60 million people, living on less than 60% of the average national income (the low-income threshold used to measure relative poverty).
Simply mentioning these figures ought to drive us to act, which is what the Heads of State and Government did in Lisbon by entering poverty and exclusion on the European agenda for the first time.
Since Europe cannot be economically strong without social justice, we can only welcome this progress.
That is why I have no option but to vote in favour of this report by our colleague, which not only endorses the Commission' s proposal but also enhances its content.
The report calls for qualitative and quantitative indicators of social exclusion to be established.
It is fundamental within the 15 States of the European Union for us all to able to speak of the same thing on the basis of identical data.
Moreover, the report calls on the Member States to be more proactive and set precise objectives when they draw up their national action plans.
Finally, the report goes back to the open method of coordination, calling for dialogue between the players involved (social partners, NGOs, local and regional authorities) and networking.
In conclusion, our Committee on Social Affairs, is proposing a budget of EUR 100 million instead of the EUR 70 proposed by the Commission.
All in all, this is a step forward that we must consolidate and encourage, since economic progress by itself can certainly not guarantee the citizens a better quality of life.
- (FR) This report has the merit of revealing the true face of European integration today: 62 million poor and 18 million unemployed.
The ongoing restructuring processes and mergers involve new redundancy plans.
Although we are seeing strong economic growth and a fall in unemployment, in the modern world work offers no protection against exclusion.
The 'working poor' , most of them women, working part-time, for a pittance and in the most insecure jobs, join the trail of poverty so loftily ignored in the official speeches about economic recovery.
Quality jobs, health care, housing and education are indeed basic rights, which, if they were binding upon employers and states, would be able to offer protection against social exclusion.
That is why we will vote in favour of the report on combating exclusion.
Yet the Members who will be endorsing this text today did not show the same surge of solidarity when they voted for a Charter without social rights which, in reducing measures to combat exclusion to the level of measures of assistance, constitutes a step backward in relation to much of the legislation now in force.
A more effective way of combating exclusion would be, for example, to establish a European minimum guaranteed wage.
- The special Lisbon Summit on employment, economic reform and social cohesion of 23-24 March 2000 brought poverty and social exclusion back onto the Union' s agenda for the first time in a long time.
In submitting its proposal for a programme to combat social exclusion, the Commission is complying with the Council' s call to present "by June 2000" an "initiative for cooperation in this field".
According to Eurostat figures, some 18% of the population of the EU live on less than 60% of the average national income (taking the low-income threshold as a measure of relative poverty).
The Commission proposal establishing a programme of Community action to encourage cooperation between Member States to combat social exclusion (2001-2005) consists of promoting a better understanding of social exclusion, mainstreaming the promotion of inclusion and developing priority actions addressed to specific target groups.
This strategy is to be implemented through three main strands.
Strand 1: analysis of characteristics, causes, processes and trends in social exclusion; strand 2: policy cooperation and exchange of best practice; strand 3: dialogue involving the various stakeholders.
The open method of coordination is emphasised which respects the principle of subsidiarity whilst actively involving all relevant actors.
This is all welcome, but like the rapporteur I believe the programme could be more radical.
I support his amendments.
- I welcome this report which calls for more funding for the proposed European programmes to combat poverty and social exclusion.
Cooperation between Member States is crucial for tackling these deep rooted problems that exist all across the EU, but particularly in my own constituency in the North-West of England.
Moss Side and Salford are amongst the most deprived inner city areas in the whole of Europe.
We are sadly all too familiar with the spider's web of problems impoverished areas face - deprivation, social exclusion, unemployment, crime and drug abuse, but with the help of European schemes tackling social exclusion and European cash, local communities can begin to free themselves from this evil tangle.
The British Labour Government has been leading the fight against poverty and social exclusion.
Three years ago, the Prime Minister set up the Social Exclusion Unit which coordinates government action to reduce social exclusion by producing joined up solutions to joined up problems.
It works with other departments which have a close bearing on social exclusion.
I fully endorse this innovative measure that has benefited many young people in particular, through strong action on truancy and school exclusion, sleeping rough, teenage pregnancy and providing support to 16-18 year olds not in education, employment or training.
This is a great example of the Labour Government delivering concrete benefits to ordinary people.
With a new, radical approach, I strongly believe that we can, not only turn the corner, but reach the finishing line too and, one day, banish poverty and social exclusion from the North-West entirely.
Rothe report (A5-0320/2000)
Mr President, I abstained from the vote for one specific reason: in my opinion, this report has not made the environmental progress that I hoped and called for.
I did vote for all the amendments intended to increase alternative energy sources, but I had hoped that we would be able to take a further step forward.
I know that it is difficult, I know that this report has, in any case, adopted the right line, but further endeavours are necessary and, to this end, I call for this alternative energy policy to be pursued more vigorously.
Mr President, with the Rothe report - at least with the interventionist aid system for renewable energy sources that it describes - we are about to make mistakes in energy policy, which will have a very serious impact on Europe in the long term.
That is why I rejected the report.
Energy policy must look to the future, be sustainable and respect market principles.
What the report seeks is precisely the opposite.
The policy of constantly subsidising wind, biomass and solar energy is mistaken and purely symbolic.
Billions are paid out in subsidies to the few who are ruining the countryside with their wind turbines.
We now have a plant with more than 60 rotors, taking up as much land as 1000 football pitches.
Left standing are the consumer and Europe itself, for this policy undermines all the advantages of our policy of liberalising the electricity markets.
Mr President, I voted for the report on the promotion of electricity from renewable energy sources.
I am, of course, in favour of saving energy, which is extremely important for us, but it is very important for pensioners and elderly people as well; if possible they need a constant supply which is always available.
The cold winter days and nights of both northern and southern Europe come to mind, where, sadly, many elderly people are forced by their low income to turn off the heating to save money.
An excellent example of energy-saving is the town of Brescia, in Italy, where district heating, which is actually generated from waste incineration, is used both to generate electricity and to generate heat which is then transported to all the houses of the townspeople of Brescia.
I call for a similar system to be adopted in all the towns of Europe.
- (FR) We will certainly not dispute the benefits of "the promotion of electricity from renewable energy sources" .
All the better if, as an added bonus, this leads to the creation of 500 000 jobs, as the report states.
Nor do we have any problem with the idea of giving support to research in this field or even the use of these sources of electricity, so that consumers will not hesitate to choose them over electricity produced by more pollutant processes.
But why should support also involve private profit?
That is the case today, because the proposed subsidies would go to private companies involved in research or marketing, including trusts such as Total Energie, Shell Solaire, ABB Alstom Power, Dalkia, a subsidiary of Vivendi, Arthur Andersen, Tiru, a joint subsidiary of Suez-Lyonnaise des eaux and Vivendi, and other industrial groups that make enough profit as it is without the need to turn to the taxpayer yet again.
Electricity production and distribution ought to be a public service.
So why could the States or the European institutions not take over this public service as a regional authority and hire the necessary 500 000 workers directly?
The savings that would result from not having to pay out profits to the shareholders of a private firm would allow the workers to be paid proper wages and provide a decent public electricity service.
- (FR) During last night's plenary debate, many of us spoke of the need to promote renewable energy sources at a time when the Conference on Climate Change is being held in The Hague.
Indeed, scientists and climatologists are increasingly less worried about hiding their fears in relation to the consequences of greenhouse gas emissions, and even the general public is starting to become aware of them.
These projections, which are dramatic in the very short term, should convince us of the need to adopt clear, proactive measures at European level targeted at checking this process of degradation in the quality of the environment.
The Commission proposal and the Rothe report we voted for today follow that line in calling for the promotion of renewable energy sources, which are alternative sources that respect the environment in the production of electricity.
This follows up the statements by the Commission and the call from the European Parliament for major progress to be made towards implementing the target set out in the White Paper of doubling the share of renewable energy in energy consumption by the year 2020.
The Member States must now pursue the same line and respect the environmental objectives they endorsed both at European level and at international level, but they must also ensure their independence as regards energy and security of supplies.
At present, the Union is dependent on outside supplies for about 50% of its energy, and that figure may well rise to 70% by the year 2020 unless we develop renewable energy sources.
Today the European Union is leading the way in the construction of plants for the various types of energy production.
If the Union wants to remain competitive in this sector, it will have to contribute by using and developing the technologies concerned, which implies major public funding.
For all these reasons, and because the Rothe report is an excellent report, I voted for it in the hope that the Commission and the Council will follow us.
- (FR) Naturally I am in favour of actively promoting renewable energy sources.
It is technological progress that will promote the use of 'friendly' energy sources, rather than appealing to ideological principles.
It is not enough to proclaim ambitious targets and to make it binding upon States to reach them. After all, the States need the resources to do so.
Some of the European Parliament' s proposals are unrealistic and I cannot endorse them.
It is the European Commission' s aim to double the share of renewable energy sources in the total consumption of energy by the year 2010.
Renewables are a very important part of an effective climate protection strategy.
In Finland peat is an important renewable energy source, and accounts for 6% of all fuel used.
Unlike in Central Europe, there is a lot of peat in the Nordic countries such as Finland.
Specialists worldwide have also said that peat is an important biomass fuel, whose annual growth clearly exceeds its consumption in Finland.
The northernmost areas of Finland are in the tundra zone, where not enough wood grows to constitute a source of natural energy.
Peat is an important fuel particularly in these regions, where it also has an important impact on employment.
I am satisfied that the European Parliament recognises these facts and includes peat in its report on renewable energy sources.
The Member States of the European Union, including Finland, are committed to achieving the Kyoto targets, conservation of natural resources and a reduction in emissions of harmful substances.
The importance of nuclear energy is increasing constantly, for this very reason.
Obviously we have to observe more progressive and effective safety and security rules when using nuclear energy and when storing nuclear waste.
Yesterday, 15 November, the Finnish energy company, Teollisuuden Voima, requested the Finnish Council of State to give a decision, in principle, on the construction of a fifth nuclear reactor.
I hope our government and parliament will take a positive view of this request.
The responsible use of nuclear energy provides the opportunity for an energy source that is environmentally friendly and economical, and there is no reason to place restrictions on its use.
. (DE) We all know that we cannot base the future of our energy supplies on the energy sources of the past.
The Commission realises that, even more so the rapporteur, by calling for greater priority than before to be attached to alternative energy sources and alternative energy production.
I therefore thank Mrs Rothe for her good report.
The first lesson we must learn from past experience with conventional energy sources - for instance, their impact on the climate and on nature, the incalculable safety risks and the foreseeable shortage of resources - is that we must considerably strengthen our support for the development and use of new energy sources.
In the long term, that means we must move away from the policy of subsidising conventional, fossil energy sources.
A first step here is consistently to break down all obstacles to the use of renewables.
Moreover, in future we must do more to make existing best practice more widely known to the public.
Secondly, the aim of any energy and economic policy must be to reduce and optimise energy consumption, for only the careful treatment of resources of whatever kind can help minimise the external costs.
In that regard, we call for more targeted research into the external costs of the production and use of renewable energy sources.
Lastly, we can only restructure energy supplies if we take account of the special conditions pertaining to alternative energy suppliers.
Decentralised electricity provision is not just a structural but also a social aspect.
Thirdly, therefore, we must not liberalise the energy sector without defining minimum social standards.
. (NL) We cannot carry on producing electricity from the customary sources.
Coal and oil supplies will eventually run out and are responsible for CO2 emission.
Nuclear energy can cause disasters capable of rendering large parts of the earth uninhabitable, and produces a hazardous waste product.
So we must go in search of energy that is already present in nature, but which has remained unused because no one has developed the technology to tap into it.
It is not very ambitious of Parliament and the Commission to only want to double the use of this form of energy over the decade to come.
There is still too little water, wind and solar power, which is what makes it comparatively expensive.
Everyone wants a method of electricity production that is as environmentally-friendly as possible, but they also want it as cheaply as possible.
This particularly applies to people who are not very well off and whose first concern, therefore, is that their household costs should remain as low as possible.
If clean energy remains an expensive option then it will also remain an elite form of energy for some time to come.
Environmentally-aware high-earners are free to make a voluntary contribution to cleaner forms of energy, within a liberalised market, whilst everyone else carries on in the same old way.
Clean energy must be available to all and affordable to all.
As far as the six points are concerned, such as the incineration of peat and organic waste, I support the veto requested by Greenpeace.
ASEM III resolution (B5-0811/2000)
- (FR) In Seoul we saw the blatant contrast between the official summit of the Heads of State and Government and the citizens' and popular movements in which I took part.
The first is aimed at speeding up the neo-liberal reforms, against which the second were protesting.
The unions and the social movements reject the dictatorship of the "chaebol" , the large, traditional industrial conglomerates, but that does not mean they want this to be replaced by the dictatorship of the IMF or the WTO.
Nor, indeed, by a new - economic - colonisation of their country, at a time when everyone is wondering which western firms will be buying out the South Korean industries that are in trouble.
The alternative forum also encouraged interparliamentary contacts, punctuated by a meeting at the South Korean National Assembly on 18 October.
What it found is beyond dispute: the elected assemblies have been kept out of the ASEM process, even though businessmen were systematically involved.
It is urgently necessary to breathe new life into the interparliamentary dialogue (ASEP) between Europe in the west and Asia in the east.
The preparation of ASEM IV must be used as an opportunity to set out our requirements for democracy, on the one hand, by ensuring that the elected assembles and civil society are kept informed and able to intervene - which involves, in particular, the establishment of a social forum - and, on the other hand, by adhering fully to social, environmental and human rights.
That concludes voting time.
(The sitting was suspended at 1.50 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m.)
TOPICAL AND URGENT DEBATE
The next item is the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance.
Central American Parliament
The first item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions:
(B5-0846/00) by Seguro and others, on behalf of the PSE Group;
(B5-0854/2000) by Gasòliba i Böhm and Mr Sánchez García, on behalf of the ELDR Group;
(B5-0859/2000) by Marset Campos and others, on behalf of the GUE/NGL Group;
(B5-0862/2000) by Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra and Mr García-Margallo y Marfil, on behalf of the PPE-DE Group
on Central America (Parlacen).
Mr President, as we all know, the European Union has, through the Commission, the Council and, particularly, the European Parliament, for a long time maintained excellent relations with Central America, its institutions and, specifically, the countries that comprise it.
We have done so out of respect and in order to assist the consolidation of democracy in that part of the world, to support and assist social and economic development and also to ensure that human rights are respected there as elsewhere in the world.
One of the priorities that we have supported for the countries in that region is regional integration.
We feel that regional integration is a crucial instrument for promoting the three fundamental objectives that I have just mentioned.
In Central America, there is already a Secretariat for Regional Integration, a Central American Bank, a Central American Upper House and a Central American Parliament.
Curiously, this and the European Parliament are the only Parliaments in the world to directly elect their members.
The Central American parliament appears to have recently been the subject of certain misunderstandings and even criticism.
We received a delegation from that parliament and made a commitment to improving the political profile not only of its role in that part of the world but also of relations between our Parliament and the Central American Parliament.
Hence the motion for a resolution that we are tabling following a project that was started a while ago by Parliament' s delegation to Central America, chaired by Mr Salafranca, and which we have modestly continued with during our term of office.
This resolution, therefore, means giving political support to the Central American Parliament, to the democratic stage par excellence, which must strive to be the focus of pluralist debate in that part of the world, and, at the same time, it means sending the message that Europe is in favour of regional integration in that part of the world.
There is just one aspect that we are unhappy with, which is not a problem of substance, but concerns item 5 of this resolution: we feel that, by adopting this item, the European Parliament has adopted an excessively paternalistic attitude.
We shall abstain from voting on item No 5, but our aim is to provide political support to the Central American Parliament and regional integration there.
Mr President, Commissioner, the resolution being tabled in this House today on the situation in Central America is timely given the recent visit of a delegation from the Central American Parliament to Brussels.
It is timely for three important reasons that affect this special American region, not to mention the importance and political appropriateness of strengthening the dialogue between the European Parliament and the Central American Parliament.
The three reasons are as follows: firstly, because it promotes the process of the consolidation of democracy and the deepening of the demand for human rights to be respected, particularly in relation to indigenous populations.
Secondly, because it coincides with the tenth Latin American Summit, which will take place shortly in Panama, and which will deal with commitments to children and young people on the basis of justice and equality in the new millennium.
Thirdly, because it also coincides with the current philosophy of the European Commission in favour of redirecting Union external action towards the countries of Latin America with the potential impact that this may have.
In this regard, we hope and trust that the necessary amounts will be allocated to provide impetus for the process of regional integration in Central America, where dialogue is becoming necessary and essential as a permanent political exercise.
We are therefore pleased with this political declaration by our Parliament in relation to the Central American Parliament, because it recognises the role that this institution plays in the process of integrating the countries of this area, situated between the north and south of America.
Mr President, I would like to remind you that for eight years I have been a member of the Delegation for Relations with the Countries of Central America and Mexico, firstly under the chairmanship of Mr Salafranca and now under the chairmanship of Mr Seguro.
I remember very well that throughout these years this delegation has maintained extraordinary relations with Parlacen and with the other Latin American parliaments.
This is perhaps because Parlacen and the European Parliament represent their citizens in a similar way.
In both cases we are directly elected.
I remember very well that Mr Salafranca signed a document with the President of Parlacen on political dialogue between the two parliaments.
At that time I believe that our political will was to enable Parlacen to have ever more competences and more economic resources and to play an effective role in the integration of the region it represents.
I believe that four years ago - Mr Salafranca perhaps remembers this better - we held a meeting, called by IRELA, in Antigua, a beautiful city in Guatemala, where we debated along with our colleagues from Parlacen what the future should be, not only of Parlacen, but also of the European Parliament.
We saw that Parlacen was going through the same changes that this Parliament went through at the beginning, since it had to fight and continues to fight to have more competences, more resources and more presence and to be recognised as representative.
I believe that this is one of the central themes of the debates at every interparliamentary conference, along with the economic and social difficulties experienced by some of the countries of Central America and South America.
Two fundamental objectives are to try to ensure that social differences are not made worse by the economic policies that currently prevail in that region and to try to ensure that the parliaments help with the integration of the area, which would be beneficial to all.
That is the purpose of this resolution.
We believe that, not only now but since Parlacen was born, there are people who wish it to have fewer competences and less of a presence, because a parliament always creates discomfort, but I believe that the vocation of Parlacen, and of this and other parliaments, is to be of benefit to the people it represents, even if this may make the established powers feel uncomfortable.
I therefore hope, Mr President, that this resolution will be approved by a large majority.
Mr President, in this debate, we wish to express - as many previous speakers have done very effectively - this Parliament' s solidarity with, and support for, the Central American Parliament at a time when we are fighting to continue to prioritise the European Union' s external relations with the countries of Latin America.
This is the approach of the report, an own-initiative report, which we in the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy are going to produce in conjunction with the competent delegations.
Mr President, parliaments - as you and all of us in Parliament know very well - have today, more than ever, the difficult task, amongst others, of showing leadership in the development of our societies, of leading the quest for solutions to the many problems facing us by strengthening the values of democracy and social justice which we stand for.
In the case of the Central American Parliament, this task is, if possible, even more important given the enormous challenge of the integration and structural development of these societies on the basis of peace, dialogue and reconciliation.
I believe that, on the basis of the 1997 Declaration, which Mrs González Álvarez referred to, we have achieved the objective of maintaining useful and realistic cooperation which we must continue, in my judgment, I would not say modestly, as Mr Seguro has said, but brilliantly, which is how he usually carries out the work in which he is involved.
I believe that the European Parliament is capable of demonstrating, through its actions, that it has a very positive view of the work of Parlacen by offering it its support and experience.
Within the framework of our respective integration processes, it is clear that both the European Parliament and the Central American Parliament are required to play an increasingly important role.
I believe that it is not our job as Members of the European Parliament to give advice to the Members of the Central American Parliament.
The Central American Parliament will continue on its own course and will take a political path in a Central America which, I believe, wishes to and must regain possession of itself in a full union of diversity.
On the basis of its shared roots, it must discover the broad range of its possible courses of development and the multiple possibilities that its project presents, by opting for peace, freedom and solidarity and also by responding to the age-old requirement of self knowledge.
I therefore believe that we have to flatly reject the self-interested criticisms of those people who brand the activity of the Central American Parliament an artificial system and accuse it of being a cardboard parliament which is hollow and devoid of substance.
The Central American Parliament, like the European Parliament, must gain prestige, credibility and legitimacy on the basis of the activity of its political groups, because the life of the parties is, or at least should be, a faithful reflection of the societies they represent.
The aim should be to create strong parliaments which participate, act, debate and rebut, ratify and rectify, which energetically defend the values of freedom, which are the driving force of the region' s political development, and which also inform the people of the progress that has been made.
Mr President, through this resolution we therefore wish to express our support for, and solidarity with, the Central American Parliament and also to ask the Commission to decisively support the multiannual programme which Parlacen has presented to the Commission, since we believe that, as an institution, it legitimises the process of integration in Central America and serves as a symbol of a new era of dialogue and peace.
Mr President, Commissioner, I hope that our European Parliament' s relationship with the Central American Parliament works, in any event, much better than the microphones in this House.
This is one of those questions on which we all feel practically the same, not only in this House but also amongst those many Members who, as result of our own origins, view with great sympathy the processes of cooperation and consolidation of the institutions in countries which we consider to be our own.
I agree with the words of the honourable Member from the Canary Islands Coalition insofar as we show our support for Parlacen because of its importance in terms of the consolidation of democratic structures and, therefore, we, as the European Parliament, must stand united with an institution such as that.
I do not share the reservations expressed by our honourable Member, the Chairman of the Delegation for Relations with the Countries of Central America and Mexico, Mr Seguro, with regard to the issue of human rights.
You can change the language if you like, but not the intention.
I believe that on these issues we have to continue to preach at home what we want to happen throughout the world, without averting our eyes when human rights are trampled underfoot in other parts of the world.
With regard to the last part of Mr Salafranca' s intervention, I would also like to express my desire that the budgetary allocations should be at least sufficient for the work, which we consider to be important and which must be carried out in cooperation with Parlacen to be completed.
In any event, I would like to express my conviction that we must ensure that actions take over from words.
In relation to cooperation with Latin America, actions are the most effective possible yardstick, from our - that is, Spain' s - point of view.
Mr President, the Commission takes note of the proposals for resolutions tabled by Parliament on respect for human rights in Central America, the process of democratisation and regional integration, and on the special importance which you attach to the role of the Central American Parliament.
The Commission follows the situation in the region with great interest and our priority objectives in our relations with the region focus on the three points which you have highlighted: respect for human rights, the consolidation of the democratic process and the strengthening of regional integration.
In this context, the Commission is taking action and we have specific projects for each of those three areas.
With regard to human rights, we have, since 1990, been supporting the cooperation programmes in favour of respect for human rights by means of education and raising awareness in this area.
You are well aware that between 1990 and 2000 EUR 65 million has been spent on this activity, which we continue to support with a view to the future.
For the next multiannual programme, which will begin soon, we are considering an additional contribution of more than EUR 10 million in order to continue this activity.
In relation to Parlacen, I must point out that since its creation it has been treated as a privileged partner by the Commission for the programmes for strengthening the process of democratisation and regional integration.
Within our framework of cooperation with the area, we have paid special attention to all those institutions which support regional integration, the general secretariat of the Central American Integration System, the Court of Justice and especially Parlacen, which is one of our priority objectives.
In particular, the Commission is currently studying the framework of that new strategy which Mr Salafranca referred to; let us hope that we can soon reach a conclusion that will allow us to release funds to support the Central American Parliament.
Finally, in the dialogue with the Central American authorities, the Commission is also reiterating the importance which must be attached to the process of regional integration as an instrument to consolidate democratisation and development in the region.
On this issue, we are also working on the definition of a new cooperation programme which should allow us to concentrate on these three fundamental elements: economic integration - the implementation of common policies - the strengthening of the institutions and the strengthening of civil society.
These points seem to us to be essential and should be the key elements of our multiannual programme between 2000 and 2006.
The joint debate is closed.
The vote will be taken at 5.30 p.m.
Côte d'Ivoire
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions:
(B5-0847/2000) by Carlotti and Junker, on behalf of the PSE Group;
(B5-0849/2000) by Rod and Maes, on behalf of the Verts/ALE Group;
(B5-0855/2000) by Van den Bos, on behalf of the ELDR Group;
(B5-0860/2000) by Sylla, Cossutta and Sjöstedt, on behalf of the GUE/NGL Group;
(B5-0863/2000) by Van Hecke, on behalf of the PPE-DE Group
on the situation in Côte d'Ivoire.
Mr President, for a long time Côte d'Ivoire stood out as a pillar of stability and relative prosperity in the tormented life of West Africa.
That is why we were so disturbed and sad to see the slow political, economic and human ruination of this country, orchestrated by the military junta of General Gueï.
In order to hold on to power, General Gueï hijacked the constitution adopted by the people of Côte d'Ivoire for his sole benefit and used it as a means of excluding his political opponents.
In order to hold on to power, he did not hesitate to exploit the bitter debate on Ivoirian nationality, sparking an explosion of xenophobia: hatred of others, of foreigners, whether from Burkina Faso or Mali, even though so many of them have lived and worked in the country for many years.
In this way he has brought Côte d'Ivoire to the brink of civil and ethnic war.
But the Ivoirian people did not allow the junta to play their murderous game to the bitter end: they forced the tyrant to flee and, by electing a long-standing opponent, Laurent Gbagbo, to rule the country, they brought Côte d'Ivoire back onto the track of democracy.
Now this process needs to be confirmed rapidly by the organisation of free, transparent and pluralist legislative elections in which all the political forces can take part.
At least, that is what both the political leaders and the people are calling for today.
The political forces of Côte d' Ivoire have already shown their sense of responsibility by playing the card of appeasement, of constitutional legality and of national reconciliation for some weeks past.
We must take note of this return to a democratic process that may indeed be incomplete, but that we must continue to support.
I believe that will also contribute to the stability of the entire region, for West Africa is going through a highly vulnerable period from that point of view.
The European Union must therefore accompany Côte d'Ivoire along the road it has itself chosen: the road towards a return to constitutional legality, to civil peace, to economic and social progress, while giving material and financial support to the organisation of the legislative elections scheduled for 10 December this year and, of course, ensuring that they are fair and pluralist.
It must also continue to cooperate with Côte d'Ivoire, so as to help it find the most appropriate solutions to the social crisis in urban areas and to tensions related to land in rural areas.
That is precisely the point of our resolution.
The extreme confusion that has characterised the electoral process over recent weeks in Côte d'Ivoire, which had looked like a model economy until now, is symptomatic of a country in crisis, reflected by an economy in crisis, social despair and, consequently, political chaos.
The real issues and national debates were overshadowed by the spurious yet contentious debate about Ivoirian nationality.
Côte d'Ivoire was driven into this widespread catastrophe because it was caught in the stranglehold of its financial commitment to lend credibility to its economic prospects and the cruel and indiscriminate fallout from international trade negotiations.
That really is the antithesis of the model of true sustainable development, the policy for the future that we Greens advocate.
The West bears a patent and overwhelming responsibility for the current collapse of the Ivoirian system.
By introducing oils and fats other than cocoa butter into the ingredients of chocolate, the European Parliament has brought about the ruin of this top international cocoa producer's entire national industry.
It knocked its social and political system off balance and has even led to the mass graves of Ivoirian civilians, the ultimate but also the direct victims of this chain of decisions and consequences starting in Brussels and ending in Ypougon.
The Greens firmly condemn all the acts of violence committed following the elections and lament the victims.
Real democracy cannot now be established in Côte d'Ivoire unless an independent commission of inquiry is set up to look into the crimes committed and unless an official undertaking is given on respect for human rights and civil peace.
Similarly, this democratic process can only become more credible if a national reconciliation committee is created, together with a national electoral committee to prepare and guarantee future elections, especially the elections of 10 December.
It is vital to have foreign observers at these elections to make sure they are conducted legally.
Mr President, has peace really returned to Côte d' Ivoire or does it only seem that way?
Gbagbo has provisionally been recognised as president on the basis of elections from which his most important opponent was excluded.
If the parliamentary elections in December do not proceed in a fair manner then the unrest will undoubtedly flare up again.
After all, the violence of recent times has left the people with deep scars.
If there is even the slightest political lapse their anger will take hold again.
It is therefore absolutely essential that the parliamentary elections due to take place in December, proceed fairly, and needless to say, exclusion for reasons of ethnicity is absolutely out of the question.
Côte d' Ivoire will only be able to regain its stability if the new rulers are prepared to engage in power-sharing.
It is also impossible to envisage lasting peace in the country without religious and ethnic tolerance.
The political, military and religious leaders must pull out all the stops to make national reconciliation possible.
What is needed is a constitution which guarantees the rights of the citizens and the political parties and rules out abuse of power.
It is also vital for relations with the neighbouring countries, especially Burkina Faso, to be restored.
We as a European Union, must be prepared to continue to provide assistance, but this will only be possible if the country is run properly and democratisation really takes shape.
The leaders have now been given a new chance and let us hope they seize it.
Côte d' Ivoire could become a role model and take the lead in the region.
But this will only be feasible if everyone takes responsibility and peace is restored for good.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I believe the first question that arises in Côte d' Ivoire is that of democracy.
Some people believe democracy is only of relative importance when it comes to Africa, that democratic procedures are a complex matter, that we have to give it time, but I personally believe that there can be no compromise with democracy and the question that arises for Côte d' Ivoire today is the same one that arises for Guinea, for example, where we now know that there are people in prison and that the system is not democratic.
For almost a year now, a few of us in this House, in particular most of my colleagues, have been alerted to the situation in Côte d' Ivoire, which I really believe offers a perfect example of how not to do things.
Firstly, a regime was allowed to take over by force, by armed force.
Nothing was said about the persecution of opponents and journalists, or about the establishment of a racist constitution based on ethnic discrimination.
Everybody just let it happen, as though they had not learned any lessons from Rwanda or former Yugoslavia.
And now they are surprised to see General Gueï end up rigging the elections.
First of all, I believe the European Union should welcome the fact that the new president, Laurent Gbagbo, is setting up a national reconciliation committee.
We must also welcome the organisation of legislative elections next month, but we must insist that these elections are transparent and do not exclude any political force or any candidate.
Equality between the political movements must be guaranteed.
And indeed that is why President Gbagbo must not dismiss the possibility of holding presidential elections, as the direct follow-up to these legislative elections.
But above all, we must, in my view, insist much more firmly on this racist constitution being declared null and void.
The debate on nationality Ivoirian - that confused debate that tends solely towards introducing discrimination in favour of a country' s own nationality, something we are combating in our own countries, and whose logical conclusion is the practice of ethnic cleansing - must be used to totally oppose any reference or connotation to Ivoirian nationality and to have these removed from the Ivoirian constitution.
I do not agree with all Mr Ouattara' s view - you need only see where I am sitting on this side of the Chamber - especially in the liberal and economic field, but I do believe that it is not acceptable, in any country whatsoever, and particularly in Côte d' Ivoire, to exclude Mr Ouattara solely because he does not have a mother and a father of Ivoirian origin.
In the same way, I believe that the 14 parties that have been excluded must be reintegrated and play a full part in these elections.
Otherwise it would mean that when someone like Mr Ouattara is excluded, second-class citizenship is de facto being introduced, and there would be two kinds of citizens and discrimination would eventually become established as a state system.
The European Union must also make sure that none of its members establishes relations with its former colonies - and let me emphasise this - that are based solely on economic interests or geostrategic location.
It was on the basis of such considerations that Hubert Védrine, the head of the French diplomatic service, actually went so far as to explain that from a certain point of view these elections were legal because they were founded on a constitution.
If we take that line, let me say that we should in fact have accepted apartheid, given that it was entirely constitutional.
Excuse me if I go even further and say that we should consequently have established better relations with Milosevic in former Yugoslavia.
Let me finish by saying this: dictatorships come into being only because there are people who are destitute and who have no access to learning, no access to knowledge.
So from that point of view I believe that it is essential that we urgently target our aid for those countries, in order to help them move towards a democratic system, at combating illiteracy, poverty and destitution.
It is at that price and by giving assistance to these people that we will finally help them to set up a democratic system.
Mr President, it is tempting to present the recent political events in Côte d' Ivoire as the victory of democracy over dictatorship, as a repeat performance of the Belgrade scenario, but this time taking place in the heart of West Africa.
It is tempting, but it would be wrong, because the reality is rather more complex and the position of the new president is quite a lot more controversial.
Naturally we welcome the fact that junta leader Gueï failed in his scheme to legitimise his power through sham elections.
The European Union, and also this Parliament, made an important contribution to this by demanding that democratic elections take place and instituting the suspension procedure.
But that still does not give Laurence Gbagdo, who won the elections, the legitimacy he needs.
After all, he drew the nationalist card too.
He also supported the amendment to the constitution, with the intention of cutting out his most significant opponent, Watara, on the grounds that one of his parents is not an Ivoirian national.
This law led to the serious disruption of traditional ethnic harmony in Côte d' Ivoire.
Since it came into force, people of foreign extraction, and in fact we are talking in terms of a third to half of the population, have been the object of discrimination and even of attacks.
Another consequence of the law was that Watara' s supporters, particularly Muslims from the north of the country, managed to successfully boycott the elections, which meant that the turnout was no higher than 40%, i.e. too low to give the new president a credible mandate.
When Watara' s supporters took to the streets in order to demand new elections their protest was put down using violent means.
Muslim quarters in the city were attacked.
At least 170 people died and 350 were wounded.
Fearing a civil war, Watara reconciled himself to the result.
It would not be illogical for the European Union to immediately demand new presidential elections, in which all candidates would be able to participate this time round.
But I recognise that there are a number of reasons for not doing so.
Firstly, it would undermine the new president' s attempts to restore national unity and reconciliation.
After all, against this background, he offered his opponents various ministerial posts and declared 9 November a national day of mourning.
Conversely, all the parties have now declared themselves willing to help to restore the constitutional state and peace.
As some delegates have already said, this must inevitably lead to the parliamentary elections on 10 December, which all parties must be able to take part in.
I do not believe it is for Europe to add fuel to the fire and stir up tensions even more when those concerned are evidently willing to engage in reconciliation.
But the real test for Gbagdo will be on 10 December.
All we can do is ensure that these are free and peaceful elections, and hope that the new Ivoirian government has a broad democratic basis. This is what is needed to restore ethnic harmony and help this country out of its economic morass.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, even if Côte d'Ivoire used to be a bastion of stability and democracy compared to other states in western and central Africa, for a long time now it has seen ethnic and religious tensions and, most recently, the abuse of power by the former government under President Bedié, which eventually led to the violent military coup.
But the fact that this military regime was recently ousted in the elections, under difficult circumstances, says something about the democratic resolve of the people of Côte d'Ivoire.
I believe there is now a chance to restore democracy and the rule of law.
Here I wish the current president a good hand and a very delicate touch.
The unrest surrounding the elections produced a death toll of about 200, which of course places a heavy burden on the future of the new regime.
But we must also say that the day of reconciliation on 9 November will send out new signals in regard to establishing democracy and the rule of law and taking seriously the demand for national reconciliation.
The European Union has been asked, and has declared itself prepared, to help ensure that the elections in December, as well as the local elections in January, are conducted in a peaceful, fair, free and transparent manner.
Here, too, we must keep a watchful eye and take a constructive approach to this process.
Much will depend on whether it really proves possible to consolidate these first cautious steps.
Of course that also means amending the constitution so that ethnic origin can no longer be taken as grounds for discrimination.
Very many parts of Africa comprise very many different ethnic and religious mixtures.
To draw such narrow boundaries between them can only produce problems and difficulties.
We know that millions of people living in Côte d'Ivoire come from one of its neighbouring countries.
I will not even broach problems such as child labour - for there also there are problems.
A peaceful environment needs to be created for these people as well, and they, too, must be given some political responsibility in the country and must not be excluded.
In that regard, I believe that the resolution reflects Parliament's resolve to make its contribution and I hope we will also manage to succeed in doing so.
Mr President, obviously it would be better if the European Parliament condemned Robert Gueï' s dictatorial manoeuvres, the transformation of the presidential elections into a farce by eliminating most of the candidates, and the ethnic violence triggered by all this.
But, as usual, the European countries in general and France in particular are disclaiming all responsibility for what is happening.
Why did the French authorities never fail to support Konan Bédié through the years, after he launched his xenophobic campaign against the large minority group of Burkinabe origin that makes up one third of the population of Côte d' Ivoire?
Why did the French Government support the election rigging by Gueï, which the European Parliament resolution is set to condemn after the event?
Why do the French Government, and the resolution itself, conceal the role of Gbagbo, the current president, in fomenting xenophobia?
The non-intervention policy which the French Government put forward to justify its guilty silence is merely a fig leaf to hide its sordid material interests.
For decades France supported the dictatorship of Houphouet-Boigny and his one-party regime in order to protect the enormous interests of French capitalist groups that are established in Côte d' Ivoire and dominate its economy.
For the same reason, it is tolerating all the villainies of its protégés who run the Ivoirian State, provided they protect French interests in return.
From Bédié to Gbagbo, not forgetting Gueï and Ouattara, all those who are vying for power in Côte d' Ivoire bear some responsibility for the rise in xenophobia and the worsening ethnic conflicts there.
But the leaders of the French State also share this responsibility.
We condemn the ethnic violence and in particular the political leaders who fomented it with their demagogic rhetoric.
We condemn the army and the police, many of whose members took part in the assassinations.
Conversely, we refuse to associate ourselves with the representatives of political parties who were or are involved in France' s Africa policy.
We declare our solidarity with the working people of all origins in Côte d' Ivoire who not only are being kept destitute but whom their leaders are trying to set one against the other.
Mr President, by means of various recent declarations, the European Union has condemned the abuses of General Gueï' s regime; it has also expressed its regret at the outright exclusion of the main opposition candidates from the election of 22 October, which has to a large extent limited the credibility of that very electoral process.
The Union has condemned General Gueï' s attempt to confiscate the election results and subsequently the army' s violent repression of the demonstrations in favour of Laurent Gbagbo and, above all, the bloody inter-ethnic massacres which have been perpetrated on the native people of the north of Côte d' Ivoire.
The Commission believes that in the current circumstances the priority should be for the legislative elections that are scheduled to be held on 10 December to be open and transparent. I would like to stress these two adjectives.
These elections must enable the political parties that were excluded from the presidential election to be represented at national level and thereby compensate, though only partially, for the defects of that first election.
These elections should make up one of the key elements of the national reconciliation that we all wish to see and are calling for.
The European Community will provide financial support for these elections to be held, and we will also cooperate by providing some one hundred observers.
Once these elections have taken place and depending on the way they are carried out, we will be able to consider holding in-depth discussions with the new Ivoirian authorities in order to determine the conditions in which we can re-establish our cooperation.
This clearly does not exclude the consideration of emergency situations, such as providing aid for the injured and victims of the recent inter-ethnic confrontations, and ECHO has allocated EUR 300 000 in emergency aid for this purpose.
The Commission recognises other priorities with regard to emergencies, which are closely related to issues such as health or education, especially in rural areas, and this is fundamental to this process being carried out in an open and democratic manner.
The joint debate is closed.
The vote will be taken at 5.30 p.m.
Human rights
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions:
Burma/Myanmar - (B5-0850/2000) by McKenna and Lucas, on behalf of the Verts/ALE Group;
(B5-0853/2000) by Kinnock, on behalf of the PSE Group;
(B5-0857/2000) by Davies and others, on behalf of the ELDR Group;
(B5-0861/2000) by Vinci and others, on behalf of the GUE/NGL Group;
(B5-0864/2000) by Maij-Weggen and others, on behalf of the PPE-DE Group;
on the situation in Burma
Vietnam- (B5-0848/2000) by Sakellariou and van den Berg, on behalf of the PSE Group;
(B5-0858/2000) by Maaten, on behalf of the ELDR Group;
(B5-0865/2000) by Posselt, on behalf of the PPE-DE Group;
(B5-0868/2000) by Dupuis, on behalf of the TDI Group;
on Vietnam.
Burma/Myanmar:
Mr President, I am very glad that there has been such strong support across the House for the powerful statement we have in this resolution condemning the military junta in Burma.
But, at the same time, I am extremely sad that we must have yet another resolution on Burma because the situation there, far from getting better, is actually getting much worse.
The need for this further resolution stems from a number of reasons.
Among the most important is the fact that the SPDC has vowed to crush the National League for Democracy by the end of this year.
The signs are that they are serious.
Their attempt to evict the NLD from their current location looks like a systematic campaign to achieve that.
The number of political prisoners appears to have risen from 1,500 to 3,000 very recently, many of whom are forced to carry out hard labour and are subject to cruel forms of torture.
The forthcoming EU/ASEAN meeting in Laos in December offers us a crucial opportunity to demonstrate our condemnation of this regime in the strongest terms.
We are calling for the Council and the Commission to postpone that meeting, to call it off, until the Burmese junta releases all political prisoners without conditions and allows freedom of movement for Aung San Suu Kyi and her party members and until the Burmese junta enters into a meaningful dialogue with the election-winning NLD and the ethnic minorities.
Aung San Suu Kyi herself has said that the constructive engagement approach by ASEAN in relation to Rangoon is not working.
The opportunity to call off and to postpone this meeting that is due next month in Laos offers us the opportunity to make the statement in the strongest terms, to send the strongest possible signal that we condemn this illegal regime.
Mr President, in an answer to me on Burma in the October session Commissioner Patten said that if things deteriorate in Burma, then holding the EU-ASEAN meeting planned for 11 and 12 December would be reconsidered.
How bad do things have to get?
Aung San Suu Kyi is held incommunicado.
There are 3,000 political prisoners, 23% of the population live below the poverty line and 40% of the children in Burma are malnourished.
Burma is now the world's second largest producer of heroin and opium after Afghanistan.
They are conducting a major offensive against the Shan people and the Karen people and, as the UN rapporteur has said, there is no sign of any dialogue between the SDPC and the NLD.
Today in Geneva the ILO are meeting as we speak and it looks very likely that they are going to support sanctions against Burma in protest about the use of forced labour.
It is my understanding that the French representative in Geneva has supported that view.
Now is the time to actually impose strict conditions on that meeting in December.
Aung San Suu Kyi must be released and allowed to travel freely and a troika must be allowed to go to Burma and to go anywhere and meet anyone they like.
Also today, Thailand, an ASEAN member, has said that Burma must allow a permanent ILO presence in that country, that there must be a mechanism to monitor forced labour and that ILO sanctions should not be lifted on their fellow ASEAN member until real results have been achieved.
How will the EU respond to these strong voices from across Europe and indeed from the region for the first time?
It is surely indefensible for the Commission and the Council to continue with any idea of holding this meeting.
It will clearly be interpreted as a softening of Europe's approach at this time.
Aung San Suu Kyi has reiterated recently that constructive engagement with Rangoon is not working and she and the NLD have asked for the meeting to be postponed.
If the EU goes ahead, the junta would be encouraged and heartened by the decision to sit our foreign ministers from democratic European governments around a table which includes the military junta of Burma.
We should be ashamed of such treachery.
ASEAN would also continue to feel that it is not necessary to do anything about the pariah in their midst.
Do we intend to collude with this or will we make a decision now to pull out?
By standing by our own principles and the values that we cherish, we will also be cherishing the values of the people of Burma who are being so systematically persecuted by the military regime in their country.
Mr President, there are several reasons as to why we are once again discussing Burma - in fact this is the second time since the summer - and nor is this the first time this year that this country has been on the agenda.
There are several reasons for this.
Not long ago, Aung San Suukyi was again denied permission to leave Rangoon and talk to the supporters of her party, the NLD, a party which won the elections by such a large majority and has never been allowed to wield power.
It is true that James Mawdsley, the activist we talked about two months ago, has been released since then.
We might think that this is a small ray of hope, but that must not divert us from the major issues, from the big picture that we get in Burma.
At the end of the day, the fact remains that the UN rapporteur for human rights returned from Burma with a negative account.
The human rights activist Soe Thein has been treated in a lamentable manner.
So there is every reason to talk about Burma again, and unfortunately there is no hope of it being the last time.
Of course, slavery in Burma is talked about at length within the IAO.
This is a subject that has not been given very much attention here to date, but, naturally, it must be discussed within the context of the European Union.
The political repression continues and the flood of refugees, mainly headed for Thailand, continues - and for that matter, Thailand is putting troops into action.
This is unacceptable in every sense by international standards.
The military regime in Burma claims to be able to maintain order and stability in a country where ethnic rivalries are never far away.
But the repression perpetrated by the regime only strengthens the rebellious feelings that can arise there and does not in any way, shape or form, lead to a resolution of potential ethnic conflicts.
The problem of course, is what should we, as the European Union, do now?
Our answer is to suggest that we keep the sanctions in place.
I really do not think we have any alternative.
The sad thing is that sanctions have proved ineffective so far.
But ASEAN' s constructive contribution has fared no better, and I also have the feeling that increasingly, the other ASEAN countries, i.e. Burma' s neighbours, are beginning to feel ashamed of their decision to allow Burma to join ASEAN.
Their philosophy of taking a constructive approach has failed and I feel that we, as the European Union, ought not to let them forget it.
Round table talks with Burma do not work.
In any case, I would not trust our own ministers to raise the matter there.
They did not say a word about human rights at the ASEAN meeting in October, and I am not confident that they would do so now.
That is why we are going to keep the sanctions strategy in place for the time being.
We readily support the amendments that Mrs Kinnock tabled on that aspect.
Mr President, Commissioner, when Thursdays arrive and we deal with the situation of human rights in the world, I am put in mind, to some extent, of what the Wailing Wall must be like.
Its sad inheritance of colonialism and neo-colonialism obliges the European Union to take a firm, very brave and decisive stance, in order to aid the re-establishment of democracy in various parts of the world, such as Latin America, which currently faces the problem of Guatemala with its fight against the impunity of military figures, Africa or, in this case, Burma.
As has been said, the truth is that the situation in Burma is getting worse; it is incredible that there is still this persecution of such an important leader of democracy as Aung San Suu Kyi and that the Democratic League cannot operate normally in its work for the re-establishment of democracy, especially when there is still economic investment in that country which is taking advantage precisely of that lack of freedom, that lack of union rights there.
We therefore believe that the European Union is obliged to take strong action at international level so that, both through sanctions and through imposing a negotiation with leaders of the democratic opposition, democracy and the normal development of the right to freedom of the people of Burma may be restored and so that we can stop talking about situations which remind us with such sadness of the facts of the past.
We therefore reaffirm the importance of this resolution and the firm commitment of the Commission and the Council in this direction.
Mr President, I speak on behalf of Mrs Maij-Weggen in this resolution, and we have had some excellent speeches this afternoon.
As we sit here in our climate-controlled comfort, the democratically elected parliamentarians of Burma are under house arrest, in hiding and under the gravest possible threat.
Meanwhile the communist junta maintains its iron grip on the people, press and the National League for Democracy.
Members of that junta have boasted about how they will exterminate the NLD before the end of this year, and for years made the same boast about the minorities.
Twice since last September we have passed resolutions deploring the administration in Burma and despite our clear and heartfelt views on this matter, we know that the EU countries will be sending foreign ministers to meet their ASEAN counterparts in Laos next month.
We must say loudly and clearly that we believe that it is absolutely wrong for them to do so, as is planned.
We, in Europe, must not give them that spurious legitimacy and we heard some excellent speeches from Mrs Lucas and Mrs Kinnock on that point.
We all know the story of Aung San Suu Kyi and we must be aware that constructive engagement between ASEAN and Rangoon has not worked.
Therefore we must call upon our governments not to do the opposite of what the Nobel and Sakharov Prize winner has asked.
Yesterday Mr James Mawdsley, who was released from Burma, sent me a message which I want to read out to you.
His words are far more eloquent than my own when confronting the evil of the Burmese regime.
He says: "the military junta in Burma is terrified of the NLD.
They are afraid of anyone who refuses to bow to their brutality.
It is abundantly clear to them that the world and NLD led by Dr Aung San Suu Kyi will not now bow.
Therefore the regime feels it must utterly destroy them.
Military intelligence officers have boasted to me that the NLD is to be crushed.
It is to be destroyed.
They laughed when they said it.
This is not sane behaviour.
They sit and laugh about the murder and repression of Burma's elected representatives.
The regime also boasts that they will kill all Karen and they are committing genocide among the Karen, Karenni and Shan ethnic groups of Burma.
I have walked through this territory: from the top of the mountains as far as the eye can see, all villages have been destroyed and the populations murdered or displaced.
I have seen victims of repression, women and men wounded, dying and dead.
The regime's hatred of the ethnic groups and for the NLD cannot be checked by appeals to reason or morality.
The regime responds only when it feels threatened.
My release demonstrates that.".
It demonstrates that the regime will only do something when it feels threatened.
These are the words of James Mawdsley, not mine.
He suffered mightily at the hands of the Burmese and he says that only when they are threatened will they do something.
We have to recognise that in relation to the ASEAN meeting.
Mr President, for many years I have had a poster on the wall of my office of Aung San Suu Kyi when she was awarded the Sakharov Prize by this Parliament.
The poster has got ragged and shabby and curling at the edges.
I kept it there in the hope that I would be able to replace it with a happier and more triumphant poster.
But, as has been said by many of the excellent speeches this afternoon, there remains still nothing but despair about this wonderful, gentle, charming and immensely brave woman and her attempts to keep the flag of freedom flying in her own country.
Her country has become an international pariah state.
ASEAN has become, in every sense of the word, a paper tiger in its failure to deal with the awful events in Burma.
An added failure on the part of the West has occurred with the departure of the UN's special rapporteur on human rights in Burma, Mr Rajsoomer Lallah.
He left because he alleged that he was getting virtually no support from the Human Rights Bureau of the United Nations.
I know myself what a source of anguish this is for the Commissioner, Mrs Mary Robinson.
Mr Lallah has said: "I see very little changing.
Year after year the General Assembly and the Commission pass resolutions.
I feel disappointed."
We feel disappointed.
We feel that notwithstanding the many expressions of support and concern from this Parliament we have failed to succeed in making the military junta respond to the concerns of the outside world.
I believe we should have sanctions.
Mr Deva has given the views of my group, which I totally support, and it is significant this afternoon that there is not one single person who has spoken who is not at one with these ideas and with the general support for Aung San Suu Kyi and her party.
She has had a special place in our hearts here in Parliament for many years.
It is almost unbelievable that to this day she remains a prisoner in her own home and has suffered as she has done over the years.
I know that it is of some small comfort that we continue to bang on the door of this evil and vicious regime and I hope very much that the suggestions that have been made by both Mr Deva and Mrs Kinnock will be recognised by the Commission and respected.
I, too, reluctantly welcome the opportunity to debate our concerns about the deteriorating human rights situation in Burma and, like many before me, I would have preferred that the situation there had improved so that we did not have to keep returning to this issue over and over again.
I hope that, by prioritising this issue as an urgency, this Parliament is giving a clear message to the Burmese people that their plight is not forgotten and that we recognise that the situation in Burma is worsening rather than improving and are determined to try and do something about it.
However, I do believe that the international community needs to move on from rhetoric to real action and, as a member of Parliament's Delegation for relations with the Member States of ASEAN, South-east Asia and the Republic of Korea, I am disappointed and concerned like others before me that the EU has decided to enter into dialogue with ASEAN in Laos next month at ministerial level.
I know the arguments that the ASEAN Member States have put to our delegation about including Burma in this group.
They believe that, by entering into dialogue with Burma, somehow or other they can influence it to change its oppressive practices because it will see the clear economic and political benefits of improving its human rights record.
Burma has been a Member of ASEAN for a number of years and there is absolutely no evidence to date that shows any improvement or an end to forced labour or executions or suppression of free speech and free movement.
The list of human rights violations by this regime continues to get longer and longer each year.
Engaging with them is a ridiculously naive concept so long as there is not even a glimmer of liberalisation in their attitude.
What this dialogue is achieving is legitimising the Burmese junta's continued brutal regime.
As I said earlier, what we want is action and not words.
If we are really serious about improving and having an impact on the lives of Burmese people we need to do some of the following.
Like others have said before me: we should postpone the meeting in Laos next month; and the Burmese junta should lift all restrictions on democratically elected political members and the leaders of NLD. The junta should also enter into dialogue with the NLD and the ethnic nationalities.
Finally, we should consider supporting ILO economic sanctions to prevent Burma from taking advantage of European trade, investments and tourism until they stop the system of forced labour.
We have a moral responsibility, as a community of values, to ensure that the citizens of Burma can enjoy the same fundamental rights as those enjoyed by citizens of Europe.
Mr President, the human rights situation in Burma continues to deteriorate under the not-so-gentle control of the military junta.
The plight of Aung San Suu Kyi continues to worsen.
She has not been allowed to travel since she was placed under house arrest on 21 September when she attempted to travel to Mandalay.
She apparently has no access to a telephone and no visitors.
There are even rumours that she has been handcuffed in her own house.
The plight of the rest of the members of the National League for Democracy is hardly any better.
Large numbers are under arrest or are being harassed, and attempts have been made to close down their offices in Burma.
The junta has said that it is their intention to try and smash the party as a whole.
But it not just Aung San Suu Kyi, it is not just the military, it is not just the NLD - there are almost 3 000 political prisoners who are suffering from hard labour and torture.
There are forced relocations of populations of ethnic minorities and there is forced labour.
The ILO has been in and tried to look at the situation and see if constructive engagement led to any improvement.
As we know, the ILO is meeting today.
It is likely to recommend sanctions because there has been no improvement.
I am beginning to get thoroughly fed up with making this speech - I have made it on three or four occasions now to the Council and the Commission - but the situation is worsening, so what are you going to do?
Council and Commission, it is now finally time to act.
You must recognise that we are making no progress whatsoever with the current approach.
Please look at imposing sanctions.
Make it absolutely clear that we are not going to attend the meeting in Laos in the presence of the Burmese military junta because that will be intolerable and the message will be that they can get away with it.
Vietnam
Mr President, I am delighted that Vietnam is on the agenda at last.
It has taken a long time.
I feel that special praise must go to Mr Dupuis for his assiduousness in this respect, because otherwise we might have had to wait even longer.
What do we see in Vietnam?
We see a country whose people are becoming more liberal whilst the powers that be are old men who cling for dear life to old ways.
It is so tragic, because Vietnam is a country with so much potential.
It has a dynamic, healthy and well-educated population.
It has natural resources such as oil, fish, coffee, rice and timber.
You feel like telling those old men to open the door and success will flood in.
Instead, we see a complete lack of press freedom and ongoing political oppression.
Just look at how the dissident Ha Is Phu was treated.
I am fully aware that the Vietnam debate is historically charged.
We must be careful what we say about Vietnam, or at least that has been customary hitherto.
After all, the West has had a certain level of involvement in the country.
It is historically charged and naturally it is an awkward situation.
When it comes to human rights, we cannot say whether the glass is half full or half empty.
The glass is not full in Vietnam.
That is what it is all about.
We work with Vietnam; it is our partner, and so we cannot afford to keep our lips sealed about the situation there.
Mr President, one might ask why the European Parliament is so deeply concerned with Vietnam.
Some might say: surely Vietnam is a very long way away from the European Union.
But I can tell you that Germany and Bavaria, for example, see Vietnam as very close.
If you travel from the Bavarian border country to the neighbouring Czech Republic, you will see many Vietnamese markets, meet many Vietnamese who are playing a very active part in that border region.
If you travel to the eastern part of the reunited Germany, you will find Vietnamese who made their home there in what used to be the Communist bloc. And in the western part, you will find Vietnamese who fled that same Communism and came to Germany as asylum seekers and refugees.
That shows how closely our destinies have been intertwined in this Eurasian continent for many years.
That also becomes very clear when you look at the parallels in the history of Europe and Germany and also of Vietnam.
Germany and Europe were divided.
Ten years ago they were reunited, in the name of freedom.
Vietnam suffered terrible wars and was torn apart by the interests of the great powers.
One day Vietnam too was reunited, not peacefully however, but by the force of arms, and it was reunited under a Communist system, a dictatorship.
We now have a situation in Vietnam in which economic reforms are certainly being carried out.
Many people believed that this would automatically also lead to political reforms.
But we can see quite clearly in many states of Asia, including Burma which we just discussed - it is a parallel case - that economic reforms, trade and cooperation, however welcome, do not automatically bring more freedom or constitutional legality.
There is a particular risk in Asia of dissociating economic and political reforms, of economic progress and economic liberalisation without political liberalisation or greater constitutional legality. I believe that without a constitutional state that is functioning properly, in the long-term Asia will lose out on trade, subsidies and investments.
That is why the economy also needs the framework of constitutional legality.
This explains why it is so important that we call clearly for the rule of law, for the so-called retraining camps to be dismantled, and above all for freedom of religion.
In Vietnam this year, part of the land of a Catholic monastery was confiscated, small groups of Protestants were harassed, missions were closed and missionaries locked up.
The Unified Buddhist Church of Vietnam, with its wealth of tradition, was brutally persecuted, although it had played such a major part in the national rebirth of Vietnam.
That is why it is our duty to stand up for these political prisoners and, regardless of any justified economic interests, to call clearly for democracy and the rule of law.
Instead of turning a blind eye to violations of human rights we must say, as the largest economic power in the world, that we want to and will cooperate with Vietnam, but only provided that it adheres ever more to democracy and the rule of law and finally initiates the overdue process of political reform.
Freedom of religion, freedom of conscience and freedom of the media are the crucial yardstick by which we will measure it.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I think Mr Maaten has put his finger on an important point: Vietnam has all the factors needed to become rich and yet today it is one of the poorest countries in the world.
It could be an Asian dragon, like the others that were discovered in recent years; nonetheless, as I said, it is one of the poorest countries.
Another problem - Mr Posselt put it better than I could - is that there is one thing lacking: over and above the question of human rights, there is a lack of democracy in Vietnam today.
That is what prevents the country from taking off; it is what prevents it from effectively combating the corruption which blights it.
So the European Union must begin to take a firm stance towards Vietnam and raise the issue of the rule of law and not just - I repeat - the issue of human rights, where there have been some signs of improvement.
These slight improvements - which we certainly do not owe to the author of the Socialist Group amendments, Mr Sakellariou - have come about over the last few years and given rise to a situation that is certainly no longer tragic but that remains disastrous and in any case still is no match for the real issues of modern-day Vietnam.
The Commission must therefore take resolute action to ensure that the question of democracy, the question of the rule of law, becomes the key to the European Union's relations with Vietnam.
So I believe this is an important resolution.
We adopted a resolution two years ago, the most recent one on Vietnam, and there, too, I do not remember - nor do I think Mr Posselt remembers - the Socialist Group giving any particular undertaking to support that resolution at the time.
We adopted the resolution and we have had occasion to note that it brought about a few small improvements.
I hope that after this resolution is adopted - without Mr Sakellariou's amendments - we will hear a firm undertaking from the Commission and a few practical responses from the Vietnamese authorities.
Mr President, I agree in many important respects with the previous speakers, because much of what is happening in Vietnam today is unacceptable.
I myself once travelled in this country and came to know its vitality, beauty and wealth of resources.
That makes me all the sadder that it is not summoning up the courage to introduce greater freedom and power of initiative, that the government and the political leaders are preventing that.
Nevertheless, in answer to Mr Dupuis, I regret in that respect that we could not agree on a joint resolution, that important and justified points that are also endorsed by the Human Rights Watch - not the most tolerant organisation when it comes to violations of human rights - were not accepted.
If you are now more or less announcing that you will vote against these amendments, then unfortunately I must announce that we will probably abstain from the vote on this resolution.
That is not because we are against its fundamental content, but because we believe that we should have found a common basis here.
Mr President, with your permission I will misuse a little of my speaking time and draw attention to a case which could not be included in the list of urgencies because it only recently became known.
In Iran, two individuals, Said Sadr and Khalil Rostamchani, have been threatened with the death penalty, or at least the public prosecutor has applied for it, in a case relating to an event held by the Heinrich Böll Foundation in Berlin after the elections.
I would ask you to draw the attention of the President of this House to this very precarious situation.
I am not necessarily calling for intervention, but we should follow this case very closely and then, if it seems necessary, also make it clear that we are against the death penalty under all circumstances, but especially for what are no more than 'ideological' crimes.
I would just ask you to approach this matter with delicacy, and I hope you will pardon me this misuse of my speaking time on the question of Vietnam.
Mr Swoboda, the European Parliament is flexible and efficient.
We have taken immediate note of what you said.
When it comes to saving lives, there are no bureaucratic obstacles.
We will ask you to supply us with the relevant facts and then we will, of course, react.
Mr President, like many others in my generation, when I walked through the streets in my home town 25, 30, 35 years ago and called out, "USA out of Vietnam!", I would never have thought that a quarter of a century later I would be forced to stand here in this House and criticise Free Vietnam partly for the same type of violation of human rights that we criticised the USA for then.
Unfortunately, it is not the case that countries that have themselves been subject to violence, oppression, torture, mutilation and mass murder automatically become angels who cannot perform such acts themselves.
Israel is probably one of the most obvious examples in world history of the fact that it is not so simple.
Every nation must learn over and over again what democracy and human rights are.
Now, however, Human Rights Watch, as Mr Swoboda mentioned, is saying that Vietnam has recently taken steps to improve the situation regarding human rights.
Tens of thousands of political prisoners have been released.
I think that is it appropriate for such a thing to be mentioned in a resolution.
We must be harsh in our criticism, but we must not ignore what is nevertheless being done.
This only weakens the criticism, and those who are being criticised get the feeling that it is of no avail what they do - if they do not do everything at once, which is something they neither can nor want to do.
Criticism can be counterproductive if it does not take into account what has actually been done.
Vietnam deserves harsh criticism of the kind reflected in the motion for a resolution - there is no doubt about that - but I think that it is appropriate for us also to include a few sentences demonstrating that we are aware that certain improvements have been made.
Mr President, it is gratifying that with President Clinton' s state visit to Vietnam, which began today, another major step has been taken towards reconciliation with the past.
The war between these two countries has not led to lasting bitterness.
It would be better still though, if the President were not just to concentrate on reinforcing mutual cooperation, when he visits Hanoi, but if he were to make this very cooperation conditional on the extraction of firm promises from Vietnam to drastically improve the prevailing lamentable human rights situation.
For there is certainly a great deal amiss in Communist Vietnam.
Contrary to Amendment No 1 tabled by the PSE Group, I noted in a document published on 10 November, that Human Rights Watch regards the human rights situation as being grave on quite a number of counts.
Think of those imprisoned for political and religious reasons, some of whom are in re-education camps.
Equally, consider how the special UN rapporteur' s recommendations regarding religious intolerance were ignored, and think of the lack of freedom of expression and the ongoing media censorship.
In particular, I would now like to take a brief look at the grave persecution of Christians taking place at present.
It is therefore right that these acts should be referred to in recital E and paragraph 5 of the joint resolution.
The most recent edition of the Asian weekly 'Far East and Economic Review' today refers to the existence of top secret documents originating from Vietnam.
These extremely secret documents give us a rare look behind the scenes of Vietnamese government policy.
Closer examination of these official papers - I have read them myself - reveals that the Protestants are the main target of persecution.
Hanoi has been particularly alarmed by the unexpectedly rapid growth of Protestant Christianity under the Hmong minority in the country' s mountainous north-western provinces, and this has prompted it to instigate cruel repressive measures.
What is telling about this is the promotion of a district official whose fury has driven hundreds of Christians to take flight.
This persecutor of churches has been asked by the powers that be to cleanse not just his own province, but also the entire district, of Christians.
The documents that have come to light are nothing less than a smoking gun.
They reveal that church closures, arrests and bible burnings are not isolated acts perpetrated by overzealous party officials.
No, these outrages derive from the political directives issued by the Vietnamese Communist party.
The lie has now been exposed.
After all, the Vietnamese government claims to have introduced freedom of worship in recent years.
President Clinton would do well to raise this matter during his present visit to Hanoi.
I urge the Council and the Commission to protest in robust terms against this flagrant abuse of freedom of worship by the Vietnamese authorities.
Mr President, I will try to speak about both issues.
Firstly, with regard to Myanmar, my colleague Chris Patten has already condemned before this House the constant violations of human rights by the military regime in Burma: executions without trial, the widespread imposition of forced labour, the enforced uprooting of local populations, hundreds of political prisoners in the country' s prisons and the clear hindering of the free functioning of political parties.
He also expressed his concern about the detention and harassment of Aung San Suu Kyi and the members of the National League for Democracy.
We in the Commission fully share your concerns about this situation and we agree wholeheartedly with the numerous criticisms expressed here today of the way in which the military regime usually makes a mockery of each and every principle contained in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
The resolution recently adopted by the United Nations demonstrates that it is not only the European Union that harbours these concerns.
However, the Commission remains convinced that a lasting solution to the current situation can only be found by means of dialogue between the military regime, the democratically elected opposition and the representatives of the ethnic minorities.
The General Affairs Council has tried to persuade the military regime of the value of this argument in favour of political dialogue and to exert pressure so that there might be changes and it will continue to do so.
The Commission supports this initiative.
Despite everything, we are convinced that we must not allow the situation prevailing in Myanmar to hijack the dialogue between the European Union and ASEAN.
Three years have passed since we held a ministerial meeting with our ASEAN partners, which is far too long a time in our relations with a region that is important for the European Union from the political and economic points of view.
That is why we believe the meeting should not be postponed.
However, that does not mean that, either now or in December, we should behave as if the accession of Myanmar to ASEAN had not affected our relations, because it has.
Our ASEAN partners know this very well and are concerned to repair this damage; on the other hand, they know that encouraging Burma to make a genuine effort and to put an end to its appalling behaviour in the field of human rights is the best way to revive relations between the Union and ASEAN.
Given the importance that both they and we attach to these relations, we hope that our ASEAN partners will continue to communicate our concerns - which we believe the majority of them share - in relation to the military regime.
I believe that the European Union-ASEAN ministerial meeting should be taken as a new opportunity to clearly and firmly express our opinions on the situation prevailing in Burma, both to the regime itself as well as to the members of ASEAN.
We will therefore exert pressure on the military regime to put an end to the violations of human rights and begin a dialogue with the democratically elected opposition and the representatives of the ethnic minorities.
With regard to the issue of Vietnam and the human rights situation, I would like to point out the following: we must remember that Vietnam is a country in transition, that its government initiated a process which led to the adoption in 1986 of a reform programme that embraced external relations and political and economic change.
Since then, Vietnam has pursued an open-door external policy, and that is why that country occupies the place that it deserves within our international relations.
Furthermore, the process has led to the signing of a cooperation agreement between the Commission and Vietnam in 1995.
During this time, Vietnam has made advances towards a market economy, which has, in particular, led to its presentation of a request to join the World Trade Organisation.
Furthermore - and I think this should be highlighted today - within the framework of the new constitution adopted in 1992, Vietnam has an elected national parliament, which has the duty of adopting legislation and to which the government must answer in relation to its policies.
According to our information, the members of parliament rigorously fulfil their function of examining legislative proposals and supervising the initiatives and policies of the government.
I believe it is important to acknowledge these advances and the context in which Vietnam continues to make progress.
It is clear, therefore, that things have been achieved, but it is also clear, as you have pointed out, that there is still much more to be done.
I fully share the concern about the problems raised by some Members: although it is true that almost 23 000 people have already been freed as a result of general amnesties, we must continue to show concern for those are still in prison for their political or religious beliefs.
It is a source of satisfaction that there is no official censorship in the Vietnamese press, but it is also absolutely clear that there is occasional censorship in the foreign press.
There is also clear pressure from the Vietnamese authorities for their own press to operate a system of self-censorship.
Furthermore, although it is to be welcomed that there has recently been a reduction in crimes punishable by the death penalty, it is clearly the case that, in our view, the death penalty should be abolished completely.
The circumstances surrounding the execution at the beginning of this year of a Vietnamese-Canadian citizen undoubtedly support our convictions in this regard.
Along with the Member States, the Commission participates in all the initiatives adopted by the European Union directed at the Vietnamese Government in relation to human rights and I can assure you that, within this process, we will continue to raise specific problems and cases and to promote a steady improvement in the human rights situation in Vietnam.
Mr President, may I briefly correct a mistake made by Mr Swoboda.
In fact, there certainly were negotiations, and we agreed a joint motion for a resolution.
Your group did not even bring up the three points you are addressing during the consultation procedure, otherwise we certainly would have found forms of wording on which we could perhaps have agreed.
We fully agreed the text.
Subsequently, you tabled amendments, which is entirely legitimate; it is just that we cannot accept the way they are worded because they seem to relativise the question.
I just wanted to point that out in order to clarify the procedure; the content of the resolution will be decided by the vote.
Mr Posselt, of course that was not a point of order but a substantive question.
I now give the floor to Mr Swoboda - Mr Dupuis, perhaps you will agree not to speak - but I would ask him to be very brief.
After all, we know what the issue is.
Of course those are points that were contained in the motion for a resolution we tabled.
In that respect, they are indeed based on negotiations, but the vote will show in what direction we are heading.
Mr President, I just want to ask Commissioner Solbes Mira whether he can give a few details of this revolutionary development, namely the elections of a democratic parliament in Vietnam, to which he referred in his statement.
I have to say it is not something that I or, I believe, my fellow Members are aware of.
Commissioner, I would ask you to take note of that and to be kind enough to reply to Mr Dupuis in the appropriate form - either in writing or orally.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place today at 5.30 p.m.
Floods in Europe
The next item is the debate on the following motions for resolution:
B5-0851/2000 by Mrs Lambert and others, on behalf of the Group of the Greens/Free European Alliance;
B5-0852/2000 by Mr Ford and others, on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists;
B5-0866/2000 by Mr Deva and others, on behalf of the Group of the European People's Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats;
B5-0867/2000 by Mrs Ainardi and others, on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left
on the floods in Europe.
Mr President, unlike many others who will be speaking this afternoon, I do not have many constituents who suffered horrendously from flooding in the UK.
Luckily, London escaped with small-scale floods, partly from rivers we had forgotten still existed because we run them through culverts.
We have, however, contributed to the causes of these floods of which those in Western Europe are only the latest result of a series of extreme and fluctuating weather conditions.
This, of course, will be of small consolation to those living with filthy water running through their houses and who might be facing enormous financial loss.
I agree that we need to do all that we can to assist them, but we would help most by changing the situation that has caused their misery and that of countless others throughout the world.
Locally, we can stop covering flood plain and water meadows with concrete.
We can change our pattern of agricultural production and we can use strategic environmental impact assessment to enable us to work with nature rather than assuming we can conquer it.
In global terms, we know our use of fossil fuel is profligate and we have not taken sufficient steps to reduce the climate-change gases we produce.
We have an opportunity to make progress at The Hague in the discussions there this week and next.
We have to implement the agreements we have already reached, but we also have to do as the Treaty states and integrate the environmental perspective into all areas of Union policy and practice, and Member States must be prepared to do this as well.
We have to move away from running our economies as if cheap fossil fuel is a good thing.
We have to pay the full price for these fuels and we have to shift to a low-carbon economy.
For once, I can agree with the words of the British Prime Minister on this and I now await his actions with eagerness.
The EU has a wonderful opportunity to really take a lead in this change to an ecologically sustainable society where we will not have to deal with floods partly caused by our own inability to face up to the consequences of our own actions.
Mr President, Europe suffered across the whole continent from the recent spate of flooding, whether it was in the United Kingdom, Ireland, Italy, Spain or France; hitting, amongst other regions in the United Kingdom, Wales and Yorkshire; in Ireland, Leinster and Munster; in Italy, Liguria and Lombardy.
There was a destruction of homes, of energy, communication and transport networks.
In my own region, the Southwest of England, we had all of these consequences.
The main railway line between Cheltenham and Swindon remains closed.
It will be closed for a month because of the damage caused by the floods.
We came within an inch or so of the town of Tewkesbury being cut off.
Two major roads were cut for a number of days: the A38 north of Gloucester and the A417 west of Gloucester.
It is the worst flooding in the United Kingdom since 1947.
In Devon, the River Taw had the highest level since records began.
In Somerset, we had tidal flooding across the coastline.
In Dorchester, the River Frome was so high that a major-incident plan was invoked to deal with the possible consequences.
We still remain on stand-by at the moment.
Tens of millions of pounds' worth of damage has been done and I agree with Mrs Lambert that we must take action to deal with our contribution towards the cause of the flooding in terms of our planning regulations, in terms of reforestation, in terms of all of the actions we have taken to make flooding that much more dangerous than in the past.
We also require the EU to give help and assistance, not just in the southwest but across all of the areas that have been affected.
The resolution calls on the Commission and the Member States to waste no time in expressing their support in practical ways by marshalling workers and equipment under the five-year plan establishing a Community action programme in the field of civil protection which was adopted on 9 December 1999.
We also call on the Commission to make use of all existing funding: ERDF, EAGGF, Guarantee Section, which have already been assigned for use in dealing with disasters of this nature to provide financial aid to SMEs, to farmers, to households, the elderly and others affected, particularly those living in exposed areas who have limited protection as recompense and as assistance towards a speedy recovery.
Mr President, I find myself on my feet again and this time on a matter which is of great concern and importance to the people of Europe as a whole and also relevant to the people of my own constituency of South East England and particularly in Sussex, Berkshire, Kent and the town of Maidenhead.
I speak of the extraordinary series of floods across Europe.
I am very well aware, from my work on the Committee on Development and Cooperation, of the recent floods in Mozambique, the Indian sub-continent, Bangladesh, the Mekong Delta and so on.
If you look at the list of countries and regions in the resolution, you can see quite how serious this matter has become.
There has been loss of life in more than one EU Member State.
There has been enormous damage, running into billions of pounds, to small and medium-sized businesses, householders, farmers, the elderly, individuals and particularly the poorest and weakest in our society.
It is obvious to me that something is going very seriously wrong.
Today there is a gathering in The Hague of the representatives of COP6. They are meeting to discuss progress on climate change.
Last Monday Jan Pronk, Holland's environment minister, stated that the effect of climate change is irreversible for ecosystems, agriculture, water supply and health.
The less we do and the longer we wait to tackle the root of the problem, the more serious the effects and the greater the strain on the resilience of peoples, plants and animals.
This is undoubtedly true.
The issues that are being discussed are for the medium and long-term.
However, this resolution tabled right across Parliament, including by my colleagues from England, deals with a very real and short-term problem faced by thousands and thousands of people in Britain and across Europe.
In Britain alone the estimated cost of the damage is about GBP 4 billion, only half of which is covered by insurance.
Across Europe this bill will rise and rise like the water level.
The Commission must make all speed to use its energies and funds to ensure that those affected in the hardest hit areas are helped immediately, through such instruments as the ERDF and the EAGGF Guarantee Section.
We must in particular help our farmers, small businesses, the elderly and the householders who have been inundated time and time again.
There is a question as to whether some of these people who have been flooded will be able to be reinsured and whether the insurance companies will take this on again.
There must also be a realisation that the rush to build housing all over the green belt and in rural areas is dangerous folly.
There was often a good reason why our forefathers did not build on these areas because they flood.
Yet today there are governments, like the present Labour government, which are steamrolling informed local opinion into building on precisely these areas.
I do not know exactly the situation across Europe but in the south-east of England this is a real and present danger.
We must fight this headlong rush.
We must take stock and take serious action to cut carbon dioxide emissions.
We must prepare effectively and in a coordinated way in order to protect ourselves.
We must do all in our power to help those already suffering from the terrible effects of the weather, both here in Europe and across the world.
I further ask, in addition to the resolution that we have tabled, that we here in Parliament hold a public hearing on climate change in the near future and I now ask the Committee of Presidents to consider this.
I ask you all to support our resolution.
Mr President, the recent floods wrought havoc and destruction throughout Europe, particularly throughout Britain and Ireland.
In my own constituency the towns of Clonmel, Fermoy and Mallow were the worst affected.
It was heartbreaking to witness the scenes of destruction of so many peoples' homes and to learn of the problems that were being experienced by many communities, businesses and farmers.
It is very regrettable that we, the European Union, do not have a budget line to assist those who face these particular difficulties, despite my attempts and attempts by others over many years to get such a budget line instated.
What I find puzzling about it is the damage it has done to areas of the economy where the European Union commits significant funds, particularly in relation to infrastructure.
It is about time that we rectified it.
The EU, in cooperation with Member State governments, should initiate a preventative action programme to strengthen infrastructure in order to stop the same scale of destruction recurring in the future when extreme weather conditions prevail.
The problem is that we know when these weather conditions are coming but no one seems to do anything to prevent the worst damage being inflicted.
The other problem I would like to raise is the additional burden that the victims of these particular tragedies will also experience, the point mentioned by my colleague, Mr Deva, namely the refusal of many insurance companies to continue insurance cover.
I wonder whether or not we, as a Union, could force these insurance companies under existing law to discharge what are essentially moral obligations, rather than do as they do at present and cherry pick and prefer a no-risk situation.
However, if we cannot force them to do that then it is an area into which Member State governments must step, to see whether or not it is possible, under the umbrella of the EU, to oblige Member State governments to provide state cover.
It is not fair that people should experience tragedies of this proportion and then face a very uncertain future when, given the climatic changes already taking place, there is an absolute certainty that the problems they have experienced over the last couple of weeks will recur, if not next year, then certainly in the years that follow.
Mr President, Commissioner, the floods which have affected various areas of northern Italy and other European countries such as the United Kingdom, Spain, Ireland and France in recent weeks once again raise the issue for Parliament both of an extraordinary, urgent intervention to alleviate the distress of the people, communities and companies affected, and a longer term policy to prevent the repetition of natural disasters of this scale.
Certain regions of Italy have suffered particularly badly for the second time in less than a month.
The damage is considerable this time as well, people have died and the material damage has been enormous.
In Liguria, in particular, entire plantations of specialised flower and fruit and vegetable crops have been destroyed and there has been a great deal of damage to seaside resorts, civil engineering works and factories, caused by storm surges as well as the floods.
And given the remarkable scale of the disaster, the request made in the resolution which we tabled together with other groups is totally justified, despite the fact that these issues have been debated recently in this House - on 26 October to be precise - and that a Parliamentary resolution was adopted on that occasion as well.
We call upon the Commission to set aside part of its budget for emergency funds, so as to incorporate the interventions envisaged by the national authorities in the areas affected, and, pursuant to Article 87(2) of the Treaty on European Union, immediately to grant fitting financial assistance to the sectors affected by the disasters and, in general, to take into consideration the fact that the majority of the disaster areas are eligible for assistance from the existing funds: the Regional Fund, the EAGGF Guarantee Fund and the LIFE programme, which can provide a genuinely substantial contribution to the reconstruction work and restore the normal lives of the peoples who have been the victims of these disasters as soon as possible, but, above all, which can contribute to preventing further such damage.
It is vital that the Union does not restrict itself to making one-off interventions after disasters have occurred.
Europe must remind the Member States to update their legislation on the environment, construction abuse, reforestation and the promotion of farming methods which seek not only to increase production quantities, but also to protect and replenish the land.
Clearly, such large-scale action cannot be developed effectively at national level alone, due, primarily, to the amount of resources necessary but also because of the very nature of the natural disasters in question which, like those resulting from climate change, certainly have no respect for borders.
With this resolution, we call for an urgent intervention contributing to repairing the damage and also for a longer-term policy to make Europe an increasingly safe and accommodating region for its citizens to live in.
Mr President, throughout their various interventions, MEPs have concentrated on two quite different points: in the first place, the problem of climate change and, in the second place, what the Commission or the European Union can do in a situation like the present one, with the extremely serious floods that have occurred.
With regard to the first subject, I should like to point out that, as Parliament also does, we attach great importance to the problem of climate change and to the conference that is at this moment taking place in The Hague.
We actively participated in the preparations for the conference and insisted that the European Union must assume a leading role in it.
We agree with a number of assertions already made to the effect that we are in this way contributing to the protection of the environment and to the credibility of the environmental protocols with a view to their ratification in 2002.
We are aware that the global destabilisation of the climate caused by the accumulation of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere will be the most important challenge for Europe' s energy sector.
The energy and transport sectors produce 85% of the total emissions of greenhouse gases in the European Union.
It is therefore these industries which ought to be making a major effort to reduce emissions.
Given its anticipated continuous growth - of more than 38% in the next decade - the transport sector will be that which requires the more important measures.
On this basis, the Commission is shortly going to be proposing two strategic documents: a combination of policies and measures designed to provide a response to the Kyoto commitments and to the objectives regarding transport and energy.
The first will deal with the security of the energy supply and the second with a revised common transport policy.
Apart from environmental problems, however, I should also like to comment on what we are able to do at the moment.
As you know, we have a basic difficulty: the legal basis for taking action.
You know that, historically, there was a budget heading dedicated to emergency aid for populations in exceptional situations.
This heading disappeared from the Budget some time ago on the basis of the argument that these were matters to which the subsidiarity principle applied and which ought to be raised at national, rather than Community, level.
Ever since then, the Commission' s margin for manoeuvre has been very limited.
The Commission has taken two initiatives along these lines.
One of these is very clear and is connected with civil protection: on 27 September 2000, we presented a draft Council decision for reinforcing Community instruments designed to coordinate the various systems of civil protection at European level.
This will be effective in helping us solve problems, but it is not going to solve problems such as those we are creating now.
All that we shall have left are the financing instruments that already exist.
Mrs Ghilardotti raised the possibility of seeking funds.
It is not so easy to do that.
As you know better than anyone, funds are fully allocated and there are no generalised fund surpluses, even though there may be specific instances where there are no budgetary implementations.
What is certain is that, if there is no legal basis for using these funds, it is very difficult to obtain them.
The Commission' s proposal, which Commissioner Wallström explained in detail in this Parliament, is therefore to use the currently existing EAGGF funds, or the structural funds of the Interreg funds.
The fact is that, in these cases, we cannot speak of actions of the Commission involving a global programme. Either we totally change the model or we shall have to think of the actions concerned as being at the request of the Member States and involving programmes or specific actions dependent upon the use of these funds.
As we said just now, we are entirely sympathetic to these practical projects, and I want to insist upon this point today, but it is absolutely essential to be able to rely on these proposals if we are to be able to take action.
With regard, finally, to the possibility of using Article 87.2, established in the Treaty, as a basis for Community aid, I believe that this involves an extravagant interpretation of this article, and that is leaving aside the budgetary problems it would create.
The article does not relate to Community aid, but relates to the compatibility of national aid with Community legislation.
What this article says is that, in the case of natural catastrophes, national aid may be compatible.
Each time the Commission has proposed the compatibility of such national aid following natural catastrophes, there has always been such compatibility.
We are therefore entirely sympathetic to acting right now within the legal and budgetary margins available to us.
Thank you, Commissioner.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place today at 5.30 p.m.
We now adjourn the sitting until the beginning of the vote at 5.30 p.m.
(The sitting was adjourned at 5 p.m. and resumed at 5.30 p.m.)
VOTE
The next item is the vote on the topical and urgent subjects of major importance.
Joint resolution on Central America:
Mr President, a purely linguistic error has occurred in introducing one of the amendments in the joint resolution.
To rectify this, I propose replacing the words '... increase in its powers' in the last sentence of paragraph 6 with the following words: 'and supports an increase in its powers as a means of deepening democracy' .
Mr President, despite the oral amendment tabled by Mr Salafranca, the Socialist Group will adhere to its proposal for a split vote on this paragraph.
Certainly, Mr Poos, that was my intention.
Report (A5-0266/2000) by Mr Rocard, on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs, on supplementary health insurance (2000/2009(INI)).
Mr President, I regard this a relatively important report, because it concerns a policy that accounts for a significant share of public expenditure, both at European Union level and at the level of its component Member States.
Depending on the state concerned, it accounts for least 10%, approximately, of public expenditure.
In addition, the report responds to what the EU Member States envisaged at the Lisbon Summit.
Moreover, the text we will be voting on calls on the European Commission to draw up a Green Paper specifically on this question.
So we should now be voting on this highly important text in the presence of only 171 MEPs, which is the number just counted.
Perhaps that is established practice here in Parliament, but I think it is very chancy to give the impression that the European Parliament as an institution is committing itself on a subject such as this one and considering entrusting the Commission with this kind of task, given the very low attendance here.
So I wonder whether Parliament could not consider postponing the vote on this document.
Mr President, I am in favour of postponing the vote out of respect for the rapporteur, Mr Rocard, who specifically asked this afternoon for the vote to be deferred.
I think we can postpone this vote out of respect for him and the work he has done.
Mr President, I have concerned myself very closely with this question and have taken part in many discussions both in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs and in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs.
This House unanimously believes that we need to work very quickly on the Commission's document, on the basis of the Rocard report, so that we can continue the political debate and take concrete measures.
Postponing the vote would mean postponing the task we entrust to the Commission.
Given what we all want to achieve, I think that is a bad idea and I therefore ask you to proceed to the vote now.
Mr President, since you have already exhausted the possibilities for points of order, this probably is not one.
But if you would permit me please, I should like to say that, whatever the view of the House on this issue, I do not appreciate the fact that almost constantly today various colleagues, in various groups, for various reasons - which may be sound - have removed our right to vote here in Strasbourg on Thursday, let alone Friday.
As a general principle, this is a very bad way to proceed.
I would urge caution on all colleagues in all of the committees and groups who choose now progressively to undermine the dignity and substance of the work of this House.
(Applause)
Thank you Mr Cox.
I respect the remarks you made and can assure you that they will be recorded in the Minutes.
(Parliament rejected the request for deferral).
Mr President, on behalf of rapporteur Rocard, I would like, in any case, to table an oral amendment to Amendment No 1.
I would like to propose - and this has been agreed in consultation with other political groups, that 'and with the support of Eurostat' be added at the end of this amendment.
I understand that this will meet with the approval of the other groups.
So let us add 'and with the support of Eurostat' .
(Parliament adopted the resolution)
EXPLANATIONS OF VOTE
Mr President, last night I had a dream which I can still remember (fortunately for I usually forget what I dream).
There was a large crowd of pensioners and elderly people and they said to me: "Mr Fatuzzo, we were not able to vote for your Pensioners' Party because, as you see, we are here in the afterlife.
Life is not bad here, but we would like to warn you that, tomorrow morning, Parliament will be voting on a report - the Rocard report - which contains an amendment tabled by yourself, Mr Fatuzzo, worded: 'calls upon the Commission ... to ensure that all necessary medical treatment and care is guaranteed to the elderly also' .
If this amendment had been adopted earlier, we would still be alive to vote for you."
I was therefore very happy to vote for the report.
Mr President, the case of the Rocard report shows quite clearly how important it is for Members to be in the House on Thursdays too because, as on Fridays, we have many important matters to vote on.
So I want to thank all those who are present here today.
. (EL) Health is a blessing, not a commodity which can comply with the rules of competition.
In its drive towards further liberalisation, the Commission is endeavouring to pave the way for new arrangements in the health and medical care sector which broaden the scope of activity of insurance companies and remove any obstacles to the business of private insurance companies at national and Community level.
The ÅU attaches greater importance to the principle of the free provision of services than to the right to heath and medical care, methodically and systematically undermining the public health system, especially in the medical care sector, by disgracefully promoting private forms of insurance as a 'necessary' complement to and/or substitute for the public-sector system of social protection.
The economic and social policy of the ÅU, which has resulted in the reduced purchasing power of and facilities available to workers, as regards the payment of contributions, the emergence of new diseases and the unaccountability of pharmaceutical companies, have caused health costs to spiral.
Because there are problems meeting the cost of medical care as the result of the budgetary discipline and cost restrictions imposed by EMU, measures are being taken to pass the cost of health care on to the workers.
Differences between insurance systems in individual Member States and obstacles to the free movement of people and freedom of residence in another Member State cannot be used as a pretext for privatising a large part - and later all - of the health care system.
The real aim of these proposals is to extend liberalisation to sectors which are of crucial importance to companies in monopoly positions, ensuring that insurance business and financial business in general are highly concentrated and meshed so that they can increase their holdings in portfolio companies.
We believe that the aim should be to strengthen the public health system and the system of social protection and to safeguard its basic content, in the sense of a universal service, by supplying high-quality medical care and preventative care to every citizen, paying particular attention to those living in remote or island areas, within the framework of a single public-sector system of health and social insurance.
- (DA) The Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament have today voted in favour of Michel Rocard' s report on supplementary health insurance.
The report takes as its starting point the observation that an ever greater proportion of health insurance in Europe is covered by supplementary health insurance schemes.
This is a serious problem if it means that people are to be treated differently on the basis of their financial circumstances and health situation.
In the course of the debate in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs, the matter was brought to a head when our fellow MEPs from the British Conservative Party said that, in insurance, the premium is based on the risk assumed by the insurance company.
For example, a woman genetically disposed to breast cancer must pay a higher premium than other women.
This is a breach of absolutely fundamental principles of solidarity on which the European social model ought to be based, and a common initiative ought therefore to be taken to ensure that no one is excluded from such supplementary schemes.
Michel Rocard' s report emphasises that health insurance is primarily a concern for the Member States and that the proximity principle should apply.
If the European Parliament is asking the Commission to produce an inventory of the Member States' policies, it is precisely because we have a common interest in all Member States having access to high-quality health services.
The better the health services provided by the Member States, the less need there is for supplementary insurance.
This is an area on which it will be natural to work within the framework of the open coordination method, as the European Council has begun doing in connection with combating social exclusion.
. (FR) We are firmly opposed to this resolution, which is totally hypocritical and endangers the public social protection systems in the European Union.
In fact, despite the very legitimate recitals on the rights acquired within the existing systems, seeking to give all citizens a high level of protection, regardless of their personal resources and the individual risks incurred, which also highlight the risks of transfer from public to private schemes, and outline the growing involvement of the latter in overall expenditure and the resulting inequalities, all the practical proposals set out in the resolution do nothing but promote the faster growth of private insurance schemes throughout the Community.
What this encourages is not a move towards efficient Community-wide public services but, on the pretext of the costs involved and the principle of subsidiarity, towards actually minimising the public service.
It would be reduced to a 'basic service' or to 'minimum standards' , which are called a 'safety net' and which would only cover a specific range of health care.
For the rest, this opens the door wide to private insurers, on condition only that they do not (from the outset) select the patient and the insurance premiums by type of disease.
In fact, the aim of this resolution is merely to organise the insurance market, whereas we should instead be organising Europe and moving it in the direction of encouraging high-quality collective schemes accessible to all.
. (DE) We are dealing again with an own-initiative report by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs, which, although supplementary health insurance is a highly topical issue, is not totally endorsed by the committee or here in the plenary of the European Parliament since, after all, 12 members did not vote for it in committee.
It is all very well to call on the Commission to present a Green Paper indicating ways in which the existing health insurance systems could be effectively supplemented and maintained by means of supplementary care schemes while providing high-quality medical care, and it is important that we should welcome the development of a single market for supplementary health insurance.
But let me specially emphasise the accuracy of the statement that all other health protection should be a matter for Member States rather than the European Union and that publicly funded healthcare systems should remain, as ever, within the exclusive competence of the Member States.
Because that is so, I think it is premature to incorporate in this resolution a long and very detailed list of points to be included in a proposal for a Commission directive.
I find it rather odd that people are already trying to tie the Commission's hands in relation to the proposal for a directive, while at the same calling on it to present a Green Paper on the current situation with regard to optional and supplementary health insurance schemes.
Are we not putting the cart before the horse?
Notwithstanding these observations and reservations, I voted for the report.
. (NL) Health insurance and pensions ought to form part of the remuneration people receive from their work.
Supplementary arrangements should only be necessary if the real provisions fall short of the mark.
They are a source of profit for banks and insurance companies, which rake the money in that people save from reductions in premiums and taxes.
Instead of regarding health insurance as part of remuneration for work or as part of payments replacing wages, increasingly, this provision is being made dependent on savings and investments.
There is a feeling that collectivity and solidarity should be done away with so that everything can be settled on an individual basis.
Everyone is being compelled just to think of their own interests, and to start attending to all kinds of unnecessary financial matters.
People who do not earn or spend much no longer count for anything.
One of the things this will do is create a divide in health care.
People who have ordinary health insurance will end up on waiting lists and receiving second-rate care, whilst those who pay extra will be able to buy the right to priority treatment and luxury.
It surprises me that rapporteur Rocard - whom as I recall, was the leader of a leftwing socialist party in the dim and distant past - is now delighted about the development of an internal market for private health care.
The remainder of his proposals serve to dress the wounds that this option will cause.
. I wholeheartedly support this report by my Socialist colleague, Michel Rocard, on the future financing of health insurance systems.
At a time when the population is ageing dramatically, it is crucial that we look at improving the health care system for people across Europe.
We should not undervalue the basic state provision and importance of arrangements between countries.
Having been ill myself in Belgium, I have witnessed at first hand the benefits of mutual recognition of health care systems.
From my own heartfelt experience, I would certainly not want to see these benefits ruined.
We are asking the Commission to look at the various national health schemes and to examine ways of ensuring a fair deal for those who spend time working in another EU country.
These national provisions are life-saving measures.
However, if we are to have an effective system that can cope with increasing pressure on existing national services, and that makes Europe a healthier place for our citizens, then we should also recognise the importance of supplementary insurance providers.
We should not discriminate against citizens applying to join private health care schemes.
The health of our citizens is extremely precious.
Citizens across the EU must be confident of receiving effective health care no matter which country they are in.
I call on the Commission to take heed of Michel Rocard's report.
That concludes the explanations of vote.
Own funds of banks (continuation)
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I am particularly pleased to be able to speak today in the presence of a group of visitors from my lovely constituency, whom I welcome very warmly.
We are continuing the debate on the report by Mrs Villiers, whom I want to congratulate very heartily on her report.
She has managed to reconcile the different opinions across the committee, so I believe this report represents a real step forward.
In particular, it is important that she managed, by achieving a very broad majority in committee, to ensure that the requirements of the small institutions - the savings banks, the cooperative banks, the small and medium-sized businesses - are also given due consideration in this important legislative project and that what is called internal rating, i.e. the internal assessment of credit risks, will be given the same status as external rating, as proposed by the Basel Committee.
I regard that as major progress.
I believe it is also important in terms of the public debate to make it clear that it is not the Basel Committee, a non-elected body, that will be deciding the definitive directives, but the European Parliament and the Council of Ministers, by the codecision procedure.
In that public debate I keep finding people referring to the Basel Committee.
In fact, the European Parliament will decide on the final legislative text jointly with the Council of Ministers, and we should make people more aware of that.
But for me the question now is the procedure that will apply.
The banking sector is very keen that we decide by a fast-track procedure.
I, too, believe that Parliament should play its part here and, if possible, take the final decision at first reading.
However, we must create the necessary conditions to ensure that the European Parliament's rights are in no way weakened. If possible, by one means or another, we must ensure that Parliament and the Council of Ministers can reach agreement at first reading on the legislative text that is then finalised.
(Applause)
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, first let me make an observation regarding my group. At the actual vote in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, we did not have a very large majority.
At least, the majority of my group voted against; and after all we did ensure that the report was not adopted during the last plenary part-session, but postponed until today.
But let me say quite emphatically, that has nothing to do with the actual content of the report, but only with the fact which Mr von Wogau has just touched on, namely that we were worried that if we tied our hands in regard to the further procedure, Parliament would be renouncing its rights.
Obviously we cannot accept that.
In the committee itself, there was consensus on the issue as such.
And the rapporteur really tried, made a real effort to bring about a consensus.
We want a consensus on this question.
And we would be well advised to reach a very broad consensus on it here in Parliament.
The forthcoming changes to own funds rules for credit institutions and investment firms will have a far-reaching impact on the banking sector and beyond.
These provisions very much influence the practices of credit institutions in granting loans.
When we see how very heavily our European economy, and especially our small and medium-sized businesses, depend on loan financing, we soon realise that this is a very large-scale economic project.
The very intensive debate on external rating made that abundantly clear.
At international level, the proposal from the Basel committee to classify risks mainly on the basis of the results of ratings by external institutions would lead to considerable distortions of competition.
It would create especially serious competitive disadvantages for medium-sized businesses.
To prevent such distortions, it is therefore most important for the institutions to have a simple, alternative means at their disposal for identifying their own funds requirements, in fact one based on the use of internal ratings.
It should be regarded as a success that the European position, as proposed from the outset by the Commission in its consultation paper, prevailed in Basel, so that the inclusion of internal rating procedures is now at the centre of the debate.
Since as things stand at present, it seems that both the Basel Committee and we ourselves have accepted internal ratings in principle, our primary task now is to formulate these procedures in such a way that on principle all credit institutions within the European Union can introduce internal ratings across the board.
That is the only way to create equal conditions of competition.
However, that also means that these institutions must be given enough time to prepare for the new rules.
The most recent information seems to suggest that the new regulation, first planned to enter into force on 1 January 2003, will be postponed until 2004.
That would give the institutions more time to implement the provisions.
So we simply have to ensure - and here I entirely agree with Mr von Wogau - that we work as closely in tandem as possible.
In particular, we must ensure that there are no major differences between Basel and ourselves in relation to timescales. Otherwise the institutions concerned would just face unreasonable burdens, additional costs or competitive disadvantages.
But one thing must also be made clear. Parliament cannot and will not give up its rights of codecision.
So that means that if we manage to reach a decision at first reading, jointly with the Council and the moderation of the Commission, we will be happy to do so, but we will not give up our right to the codecision procedure from the outset.
It is up to the Council.
It is the Council that has always delayed legislative procedures in the past.
It must get its act together and ensure that we can proceed rapidly.
Parliament has never been responsible for the failure of such procedures.
Nor would it be responsible for failure in this case. So, ladies and gentlemen of the Council, do get on with it.
Mr President, there is a strong case for fast track when it comes to implementing the results of the Basel review on bank capital adequacy.
The Americans will be able to introduce its provisions immediately without primary legislation, unlike us, and they will be able to lend more cheaply than European banks.
Moreover, Parliament has had ample time to inform itself on the issues with this welcome Villiers report on capital adequacy.
In effect, we are having a first reading before the proposals have been tabled.
Some people in this House think that it fatally undermines Parliament's powers.
We disagree.
Delegating powers over technical matters is essential if regulation is to keep up with the innovations in financial markets, as long as those delegated powers are subject to proper scrutiny.
We are here to use our powers in the interests of European businesses and our constituents, and we shall not be forgiven if we fail to do so.
Dogmatically insisting that Parliament should get involved with every technical judgment will simply mean that regulation will be out of date before it even starts.
It takes two to three years to pass EU law but only weeks to launch a new financial services product with implications for bank capital, such as credit derivatives.
I appeal to all colleagues and particularly to the Socialist Group, to re-examine their views on this matter and look at what safeguards they would like to see in primary legislation to enable the delegation of powers.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, it is difficult to argue with the general substance of Mrs Villiers' report.
But what we could find surprising is its very existence, and the existence of the Commission' s new initiative here.
What are we talking about?
The issue is to do with updating the European rules on banks' own funds, funds that are supposed to be proportionate to the nature and scale of the risks incurred by these establishments.
The report refers to a growing consensus that the present framework fails adequately to capture the changes in the financial sector over the past ten years.
Given that the phrase "growing consensus" - I am quoting from the report - in fact implies that there is no consensus on the subject as yet, we are justified in asking whether the institution promoting this reform, the chosen instrument and the chosen time are really appropriate.
One cannot help feeling that Parliament, following the Commission, feels obliged to align its activities with those of the Basel committee, which, let me remind you, has no legitimate right to impose its views on the Member States.
Let me also remind you that only eight Member States are represented on that committee, which on the other hand includes representatives of countries that are the main competitors of European countries.
But let us, after all, assume that the referee has not sold out to the other side and let us accept the idea that the texts by the Commission and the rapporteur respond to a real and growing problem, as the report has it, and that the fact that these matters are being considered here at the same time the Basel committee is considering them is a chance to settle them finally.
Do you not think it is paradoxical to try to catch up on free America by imposing a further constraint on the European banks? Does it not seem paradoxical to translate what is no more than a recommendation to the large banks into binding provisions for EU credit institutions?
The rapporteur is probably aware how grotesque it is to call for simple rules to reflect a situation that is complex and has become more complex.
As for the sense of urgency that Mrs Villiers has added to the Commission' s sense of the need for these measures by calling for a fast-track procedure for adopting them, we have to say that the rapporteur herself acknowledges that these new rules will have no effect on the anti-competition practices that are, alas, so widespread in the United States.
Under these circumstances, this kind of initiative is more likely to have an effect opposite to that anticipated and to impose additional constraints on our banking sectors, without any guarantees of compensation.
Despite the exhortations of Parliament, the Commission has absolutely no means of guaranteeing that the American authorities will stop discriminating against EU banks.
Yet this report does have some merits, ladies and gentlemen, including the fact that it represents real progress in relation both to the first Basel text and to the Commission text.
Mrs Villiers is aware of the concerns of the small and medium-sized businesses, which to a large extent depend on bank financing, and she has sensibly asked the Commission to carry out an internal assessment of the central component of its new rules, so as not to raise the cost of loan finance granted to these enterprises.
If, in its wisdom, Parliament decides by a majority to confirm a principle to which we should not like to see any exceptions, the Union for the Europe of Nations Group will be happy to vote for the report.
If not, we will show that we are sceptical not about your work but about a procedure that we regard as a new stage in a process...
(The President cut the speaker off)
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I am glad such a large majority has agreed with the arguments of this important report.
I can only congratulate Mrs Villiers on it, for as Mr von Wogau said, she has managed to cover the spectrum of banks and their clients in Europe in this good report.
We are in favour of matching the own capital held to cover credit risks more closely with the economic risk level and further developing the rules on own funds.
We are in favour of putting more emphasis on risk mitigation techniques; and we are also in favour of broadening the basic concept of the Basel Committee.
The Basel Committee's proposals only concern the large banks and external rating, while we believe it is necessary to broaden them to cover the small banks and to include internal rating.
Another positive note in this regard is that it was clearly accepted that internal bank collateral mitigates risks.
One reason that is so important is that purely external rating would have significantly increased the costs of loans for small and medium-sized businesses.
It is the small and medium-sized businesses that create most new jobs and protect existing ones.
The merit of this report is that it emphasises the links between loan costs, job creation, support for small and medium-sized businesses and the recognition of internal in addition to external ratings.
We will therefore vote for it with great conviction.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I too would like to begin with very warm thanks to Mrs Theresa Villiers.
In her report, she has splendidly succeeded in reconciling the entire spectrum of opinion in our Parliament.
Let me briefly address the problem that in Basel we are creating a framework for systems that are not necessarily compatible, systems in the USA and systems in Europe, and here we must ensure that we do not ride roughshod over a particular area.
Basel is looking primarily at the large banks.
But we in Europe must look at the small banks.
Their clients have few funds.
We know that the large banks are no longer interested in them.
Of course we must also make sure that Basel does not produce a second disadvantage for banks, as a result of higher own-funds requirements.
As we keep repeating, it would be the small and medium-sized businesses that would bear the brunt, although we keep urging that they should be bolstered up.
Internal and external ratings have just been discussed.
I would also raise the question of portfolio straddling.
We must ensure that the level of risk is assessed, and not just credit in the abstract, i.e. that we leave some room for manoeuvre in relation to small loans for small and medium-sized businesses and craft firms.
I believe it is important that we also make it clear that what is going on in Basel is an undemocratic procedure, that the European Parliament is the only democratically legitimate organisation that is adopting a position on this in Europe.
During the procedure we must not think about whether we are surrendering rights, but about the degree of detail to which we regulate matters in Europe in future, or where we should simply establish the framework and pass on certain instruments of adjustment to other institutions, such as the Commission, but also Basel.
I also call on the European Central Bank and the Commission to take great care in Basel to ensure that Basel takes account of the structure of the European systems.
Today we in the European Parliament must also send out the signal that we will not allow our established systems to be put at risk and that the large banks will also face problems if a legal framework is created in Europe.
What we need is sufficient flexibility in this area.
Mr President, in the first place, I would point out that the Commission is pleased to see that Mrs Villiers' report relates not only to the evaluation of the Own Resources Directive but also to the current revision of the changes to the regulations concerning capital adequacy.
We also think that this report makes an important and satisfactory contribution to the whole process.
The reaction to the two consultation documents on this subject - that of the European Commission and that of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision - has been positive, and I should like to comment on the latter document.
I appreciate that the capacity of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision has nothing to do with that of the European Parliament.
It has no legislative power, but nor should it be forgotten that it is a matter of actual fact that the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision belongs to the Group of the Ten and that, even though it is not a legislative body, its standards apply in 130 countries and are used by a multiplicity of international organisations, including the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and, obviously, third countries.
It is therefore important not to dissociate ourselves from what is happening in Basel, even though we obviously have our own legislative procedure.
It is, of course, crucial that we should define our own rules to enable us, as the European Union, also to influence what is being decided in Basel.
Having made this initial comment, I should like to point out that I believe that economic operators are also satisfied with the approach adopted towards these regulations on capital, which help deal with the issues related to risk.
The Commission believes that the high degree of support given by the report to the aforementioned approach of the Commission' s consultation paper is obviously to be welcomed.
The report coincides, to a large degree, with the ideas of the Commission and the objectives we are trying to achieve.
The Commission will continue to be especially vigilant in ensuring that the potentially most vulnerable sectors are taken into account.
The report highlights a number of valid concerns regarding the possible damage that may be caused, for example in the SMEs sector, and also to our banking system and to those of our investment institutions which do not maintain a competitive level within the European Union and between the European Union and other countries in the world.
We all know that, on this point, Mr Lamfalussy has prepared a very clear and enormously useful report which may help us produce legislation that is more effective, more efficient and, so to speak, better adjusted to the changes occurring in the market.
We have to confront a situation in which we must ensure that the new directives are not superseded as soon as they are adopted and that the standards under existing directives are capable of keeping pace with the rapid development of the financial markets.
Inflexibility and lack of adaptability are damaging the competitiveness of our financial institutions.
I should like to say, in the first place, that our legislation must be sufficiently up to date and be flexible enough to respond to the rapid developments in the market.
Secondly, we must avoid the excessive costs which can affect financial institutions and, consequently and indirectly, the clients of those financial institutions.
We ought to support these objectives by means of sound and prudent standards which guarantee the security of our markets and institutions.
And finally, and this is a key point, we are entirely alert to the fact that we ought to respect the institutional balance established in the Treaty.
It is at present far too soon to speak of the Commission' s adopting a formal position on these subjects, but perhaps we can define a number of outline features of the possible approach.
This approach could refer to different levels.
A first level would include the basic principles, or codes principals, to be included in certain norms such as directives.
In the second place, there would be a level of technical detail covering that area which will be most subject to change if we want the regulations to reflect best practice.
This could be included in annexes to these directives, and we would have to devise a satisfactory system for modifying them quickly.
We would be talking about a second level of decision-making.
There would also be a third level corresponding to the implementation of mechanisms enabling us to promote consistency and convergence in the area of supervision and to reinforce what is stated along those lines in the paper produced by the Member States and the Commission.
A basic point for us in the process is the way in which we seek to maintain the present institutional balance.
Parliament will, in future, require that the principles underlying its decision-making should be observed by means of an agreement on this future regulation model and that these principles, to the extent that they can be applied, should be of substance and respond to more practical issues rather than to generalities.
These are a few initial thoughts on how we might succeed in devising a rapid legislative process which is controllable and efficient within the current Treaty regulations.
I hope that Parliament will take an active part in the discussions over the next few months.
Turning to the points in the specific amendments which are to be made and which have been included in the report, I should like to make two comments.
Regarding, in the first place, Amendments Nos 8 and 13: the use of an approach based on internal ratings must be introduced in a sound and prudent way.
For many institutions, this approach may be neither desirable nor appropriate and, of course, its use must never be compulsory.
Right from the start, the Commission has been in favour of developing a full internal ratings system, subject to standards which may be achieved by well-managed institutions, independently of their size or of the sector in which they operate.
This is a positive development we should like to see adopted by as many institutions as possible, but we appreciate that it would not be right to insist on an internal ratings system for all financial institutions.
With regard to Amendment No 12 on the supervisory review system, I should like to point out that it is already within the powers of the supervisors to request or establish levels in excess of the minimum capital requirements.
The proposal to use this instrument solely as a type of last resort would reduce the impact of the supervisory review process as a key element of this framework.
I therefore think that the position needs to remain as it is.
The debate is closed.
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 9 a.m.
The European Ombudsman
The next item is the report (A5-0293/2000) by Mrs Almeida Garrett, on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs, on the modification of Parliament' s decision of 9 March 1994 on the regulations governing performance of the Ombudsman' s duties.
Mr President, we are here today to debate the first of two reports on modifying the statute and general conditions governing the performance of the Ombudsman' s duties.
I apologise to the House for being tempted at the end of the afternoon at the end of this part-session to take some of my longings for home as my inspiration for the debate on this report.
If we think about it, as in relations with children, there comes a point in the process of the birth and growth of institutions that develop within others when we have to show, through our actions, that we acknowledge their independence.
The time has now come to acknowledge that the institution of the 'European Ombudsman' is sufficiently grown up and has shown sufficient signs of maturity to have its own budget.
Although, in the early stages, it seemed right and proper to have the independence of the Ombudsman' s mandate and actions coexist with a dependency on the financial resources of the European Parliament budget, today this no longer makes sense.
What we are now proposing is precisely that this separation should be acknowledged, as in the Council regulation of December 1999, approving the creation of a specific section for the Ombudsman in the general budget of the European Communities.
This was a fundamental step forwards, as the Ombudsman was considered to be an independent institution in terms of the application of the Financial Regulation.
This step was nothing more than the acknowledgement that the growing visibility of an institution which was born and which grew out of the need to bring European citizens closer to the life of the Community institutions also needs financial independence in order to take full responsibility for the budgetary provisions it makes and considers appropriate for the material and human resources necessary to ensure the proper discharge of its worthy duties.
We therefore now need to adapt its statute to the Financial Regulation and propose that two articles be deleted - Article 12 and Article 16 of Parliament' s 1994 decision - which, as we all know, approved the general conditions of the performance of the European Ombudsman' s duties.
These rules stopped reflecting the budgetary situation after the last amendment to the Community Financial Regulation.
We therefore need to recognise that this does not correspond to the real situation and approve its deletion.
Given that we will soon have to apply ourselves in this Parliament to fundamental changes to the statute of the European Ombudsman, which are still being discussed in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs, to whose report I have been given access and which addresses the issue of extending the Ombudsman' s powers of investigation, we will wait until then for a complete, qualitative revision of the text of that statute.
Before I finish, Mr President, I wish to take this opportunity to welcome the rapporteur, Mr Söderman, and congratulate him on his work on fighting maladministration and thereby also bringing European citizens closer to the life of the Community institutions.
Mr President, I hope the rapporteur will not mind if I say that this is a relatively obscure report that we are taking fairly late on a Thursday evening and that it goes right to the very heart of democracy in the European Union: How do we protect the rights of European citizens?
There is no doubt that in that role the position of Ombudsman is absolutely critical.
The Ombudsman has a distinctive role and position in the framework of the European institution, but it is a role that requires autonomy.
As we all know, if you are to be independent you need to have financial independence.
In English we have a phrase: "He who pays the piper calls the tune."
Those who pay for activities or organisations are generally seen to wield some power over those activities or organisations.
That is why the Ombudsman needs to be financially autonomous and as independent as possible so that we in this Parliament cannot be accused of calling the tune.
The public need to have the utmost confidence that the Ombudsman is completely impartial in his investigations.
I, of course, like all Members of this Parliament, have total confidence that Mr Jacob Söderman discharges his responsibilities totally independently but that must be seen to be the case.
That is why financial autonomy is necessary.
It is perhaps also worth pointing out to European citizens that the Ombudsman's office - not him personally - costs something like EUR 3.9 million a year or less than one cent per person in the European Union.
To my English listeners that is roughly half a penny per annum and that is money well spent.
Thanks to the initiative taken by the Chairman of the Committee on Petitions, Mr Gemelli, the correct legal action has been taken to amend the 1994 decision by the European Parliament on the Ombudsman's competencies and duties.
As a result of this, the Petitions Committee, in the González Álvarez report, said that the procedure to amend the Ombudsman's statute should be seen in the light of Article 195 of the European Communities Treaty.
Let us never forget that the role of the Ombudsman is one that is enshrined in the European treaties.
The EPP/ED Group supports the view of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs that the Ombudsman's competences should be enlarged and the sooner the better, especially in the fields of the Ombudsman's investigative powers laid down in Article 3 of the 1994 decision.
The quality of the Ombudsman's actions taken so far proves that the institution of the Ombudsman is growing as a full and necessary instrument for European citizens to submit complaints of maladministration by European institutions.
We in my group appreciate the Ombudsman's support for the Petitions Committee, the committee that is responsible for relations between the Ombudsman and Parliament.
In this respect the EPP/ED Group encourages the Ombudsman to continue his work through his special reports which we are always ready to consider in a positive spirit of cooperation with the Ombudsman.
I hope that in the very near future Parliament will consider enhancing the Ombudsman's investigative powers.
If that happens, the Petitions Committee would expect to be fully and carefully consulted by the Constitutional Affairs Committee.
We are, as I have already said, the committee with responsibility for relations with the Ombudsman and we work closely with him.
The EPP/ED Group supports this report therefore and hopes that this, along with the Bösch report on the Ombudsman's report on recruitment procedures, is a sign of the European Parliament's continued commitment to increasing transparency and accountability.
We do not need extra work and we do not want to see examples of maladministration, but it is important that we remind European citizens that the office of Ombudsman is there to help them if problems of maladministration arise.
A lot of people unfairly criticise us for the democratic deficit.
The Ombudsman's office certainly helps to redress that democratic deficit.
Mr President, in accordance with the Nordic public service tradition, the European Parliament has, positively enough, claimed that the Ombudsman's position should be strengthened and consolidated.
The European Ombudsman ought to be completely impartial when carrying out his or her duties and when he or she - right now it is Jacob Söderman, a man and a good Finland-Swedish representative - defends the rights of citizens in cases of bad administration.
Only in this way can the office of Ombudsman, at EU level too, serve its important and more profound purposes.
Therefore, we in the Swedish Christian Democrat Party warmly welcome the steps that are now about to be taken also to promote the Ombudsman's independence in such fundamental areas as the budget.
This is an important credibility issue for the independence and impartiality of the office of Ombudsman.
We in the European Parliament's Committee on Constitutional Affairs have consistently given our full support to this positive measure.
I would like to thank the rapporteur, Almeida Garrett, for her contribution in this important matter.
Finally, allow me to take up another topical issue which concerns the development of the office of Ombudsman.
It concerns the right of access to documents without restriction, something which is only rarely utilised.
This is a prerequisite for giving the institution of Ombudsman high credibility among citizens.
An Ombudsman is naturally bound by secrecy provisions, but it is good for citizens to know that, as Ombudsman, he or she can obtain access to documents which they cannot access themselves as citizens.
It is also important to realise that the Ombudsman's right of access to documents has nothing to do with the current regulation on openness, which is a frequent misconception.
The European Parliament, its Committee on Constitutional Affairs and, we hope, the Commission and the Council too, want to see continued development and a strengthening of the office of Ombudsman and its independence and, alongside that, its credibility among citizens.
Mr President, the Commission can be very brief on this matter.
The sole purpose of the report is to establish a concordance between the European Ombudsman' s statute and a modification of the financial regulations, and this modification, as the rapporteur has pointed out, seeks to include a separate section for the Ombudsman' s budget in the general Budget of the European Communities.
The Commission has already signalled its agreement on this matter in the past, both for technical budgetary reasons and for reasons to do with the independence of the Ombudsman' s duties.
We therefore fully support the changes to the Ombudsman' s statute proposed to us by Mrs Almeida Garrett.
Thank you, Commissioner.
The debate is closed.
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 9 a.m.
Special report by the European Ombudsman on Commission recruitment
The next item is the report (A5-0280/2000) by Mr Bösch, on behalf of the Committee on Petitions, on the special report from the European Ombudsman to the European Parliament following the own-initiative inquiry into the secrecy which forms part of the Commission' s recruitment procedures (C5-0082/2000 - 2000/2048 (COS)).
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I believe that the report we are debating this evening fits very well into today's agenda, because around midday today we already adopted an important report on access to documents, and I believe what we are discussing now and will have to decide tomorrow is very closely related to that.
In relation to the Ombudsman, a matter we have just been discussing, there were several complaints in the past about the lack of transparency in regard to recruitment, and that is a very crucial point, because we entirely agree with the Ombudsman's view that recruitment procedures are many young EU citizens' first contact with the European institutions.
Here it is important for the procedures to be highly transparent, comprehensible and open.
Accordingly, the point of departure of this report was the recommendation by the Ombudsman to the Commission to give applicants access to their own marked examination scripts during the selection procedure it organised.
The previous Commission did not comply with this recommendation, despite several requests.
That was one reason why the Ombudsman adopted a special report in which he once again emphasised his concern in this respect.
Meanwhile, the Prodi Commission has agreed to implement the fourth recommendation addressed to it and to allow applicants access to their own corrected test papers in a selection procedure.
Our committee, the Committee on Petitions, looked into the matter and adopted the report before us.
When we adopted this report in committee we decided on principle to accept the Ombudsman's recommendation. We would also like to give warm thanks to the Commission and congratulate it on its positive response to the Ombudsman's proposal.
The hope was also expressed that all other European bodies and institutions will follow the Commission's example and grant job applicants access to their own, corrected test papers.
We believe that giving applicants for jobs in the European institutions this kind of more transparent and open access would also represent an important step in the widely broadcast reform of the European Commission.
It would also bring Brussels and Europe closer to the citizen and make them more comprehensible.
A word now on the amendments, on which we shall be voting tomorrow.
To a large extent, they respond to the recommendation made by the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, and on that basis, they are clearly intended to spell out in a little more detail what we actually expect of the Commission in this respect.
In particular - and this is also part of the amendments - I think it is important to set the Commission a sensible timetable for implementing these announced reform measures. I hope - that is my position as rapporteur - that the House will endorse this view.
Mr President, speaking both as a member of the Committee on Legal Affairs and on behalf of my own group, I, too, very much welcome this.
I am speaking today on behalf of our Co-President, Mrs Hautala, who is unable to be here this evening.
It is her opinion in particular that I want to draw attention to as I speak tonight.
We very much welcome the Ombudsman's report.
We particularly welcome the reforms and changes which we believe ought to be and, Commission-willing, will be introduced as a result of this report.
After all, access to documentation is a fundamental civil right and no documentation is more important to a candidate than documentation in relation to examinations.
The core of the Ombudsman's report is the fact that candidates for Community recruitment are entitled, if they so request, to see their examination scripts.
We also want to make a particular point about minority languages.
There is a great difficulty about examining people in a different language.
I have had to do it myself from time to time, looking at scripts in Italian or German as a native English - or at least a kind of English - speaker.
The difficulty is resolved by translation, but then we must be sure that the quality of translation is high and that the candidate can check that what was written in the original language is what appears in the paper as examined.
If there are inconsistencies it must be open to the candidate to draw attention to them.
We are glad that the Commission is going to do this.
Not only the Commission but the other institutions and bodies of the Community ought to comply with the Ombudsman's recommendations, even in the case of recruitment procedures which have already been initiated.
It is regrettable that the Commission agreed to apply the Ombudsman's recommendation only for recruitment procedures launched after June 2000.
We believe that the institutions of the Community should conduct their staff recruitment procedures, and indeed all recruitment procedures, with a maximum of openness and transparency in order to avoid the suspicion of partiality, injustice and administrative incompetence.
We must also make sure that the procedures encourage the appointment of women to salary groups, including the highest salary groups in which they are under-represented.
We would also like to draw attention to the point about temporary and auxiliary posts in the institutions, offices and bodies of the Community and the Union.
These should be published in the Official Journal and in the press and on the Internet to guarantee a genuine sense of competition.
Senior officials must ensure that merit is rewarded and that all vacant posts, even the most senior ones, should be published in the Official Journal and on the Internet.
Further, persons employed in the private offices of members of the Commission must be obliged to take part in a general selection procedure before they can take up any other vacant post in the institution in question.
We note, for example, that Mr Prodi's former chef de cabinet was transferred to another post in the Commission hierarchy.
We hope that he will see that he should resign when the mandate of the current Commission finishes, since he has never passed a Commission competition at all.
It is a byword throughout the Union that it is difficult to get into jobs unless you are well connected.
We must do all that we can to make that byword not merely false, but seen to be false.
Mr President, Mr Bösch has drawn up an excellent report and we thank him for it, as we do Mrs Hautala, representing the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market.
In fact, we must thank all those involved in this matter.
We thank the Ombudsman for his initiative, his determination to achieve transparency and his extreme attention to relations between citizens and the European administration.
Congratulations also to the European Commission, which, after some hesitation, cooperated fully with the Ombudsman and responded to his demands, especially to the recommendation that is the subject of this report.
We thought it legitimate for candidates to have access to their marked test papers, since access to documents is a fundamental right and one that is also recognised in the Charter of Fundamental Rights we adopted this week.
In the same way, we find it entirely justified for candidates to be able to take the examination questions home with them after the test.
The recruitment procedures must be transparent to avoid all abuse; that is obvious.
Yet, we feel that a certain flexibility is required.
We must not introduce more rigidity into provisions that may apply to institutions as different as the Commission and the Court of Justice.
Nor do I think we should further burden some procedures with cumbersome provisions that are disproportionate to the real risks of dispute.
I am referring here to an amendment on the need to provide indisputable proof relating, for instance, to oral test procedures.
Our group was very satisfied with the vote in the Committee on Petitions.
The rapporteur proposed new amendments in plenary session.
We studied them and we can accept three of them, which are in line with the way we voted in committee.
We think the others are difficult to implement, or even rather out of context.
In conclusion, I would say that we welcome the fact that the European Commission followed the Ombudsman' s recommendations.
This dialogue between the mediator and the Commission proves that the latter wants to follow a policy of transparency and good administration.
That resolve will encourage a rapprochement between the institutions and the European citizens. It also shows very clearly how useful and effective the Ombudsman is.
Mr President, the job of the European Ombudsman was established in the Maastricht Treaty at the same time as the concept of citizenship of the Union was introduced.
The Ombudsman looks after the public interest in the direction of the administration.
The Ombudsman, Jacob Söderman, works, by virtue of his job description, for the people and in order for good administration to take root in the Union.
We all know that there is still much to do.
It is, however, vitally important to adopt good, open and effective administrative practice, so that the European Union will gain the support and confidence of its citizens more satisfactorily than it does at present.
The Ombudsman' s report discussed this time regards the secrecy attached to the Commission' s recruitment procedure.
The report contains recommendations that the Commission has already begun to implement.
The rapporteur, Herbert Bösch, from the Committee on Petitions, states in the explanatory statement in his report that the principles that led to the Ombudsman' s recommendations proved to be the same as those adhered to by the European Parliament: correctness, transparency and the desire to create confidence.
And that is how it should be.
Parliament is a body elected directly by the people.
Its job is legislation and to monitor the Union' s bureaucratic machine on behalf of the public.
Parliament and the Ombudsman must therefore work for the same causes.
The report by the Committee on Petitions states that the Committee approves the special report being discussed and, in particular, the point which states the desire to improve the impression the public gets of the institutions from our competitions procedures.
The most important of Mr Söderman' s proposals is the right of applicants to have access to their corrected examination papers afterwards.
The Committee says that the Commission has informed the Ombudsman it was implementing this recommendation as from the start of July 2000.
In addition, the report urges all the institutions and bodies of the European Communities to allow applicants to have access to their corrected examination papers in future recruitment competitions, if they so request.
My colleague, Mr Bösch, has already briefly presented here the amendments to the report he tabled.
I hope they will be supported in Parliament.
Mr President, if the European Union is to have any future it needs the supports of its citizens and this can only be achieved if people trust the Union and its institutions.
As things stand, the institutions are too often experienced as remote and bureaucratic - something which has had negative repercussions for Parliament as shown, for instance, in the low turnout in the last elections.
Taking part in competitions for jobs in the European Union is for many people their first close-up experience of the European institutions.
Any doubts concerning the fairness of the competitions must therefore be taken seriously.
The fact that these competitions have been surrounded by suspicions of irregularities and favouritism in the media has been quite damaging to the public perception of the institutions.
Having good staff and officials is obviously in itself essential for well-functioning institutions and this can only be assured if the recruitment procedure is impartial and as objective as possible.
Transparency in the procedure, with due respect for the independence of the boards, is central in this regard.
Allowing the candidates to see their marked tests is a simple means of increasing transparency and confidence in the procedure for the recruitment of European civil servants.
The Ombudsman's initiative and recommendations can therefore be warmly welcomed, as can the decision by the Commission to follow them.
The example should be followed by all other institutions and bodies, as the Committee on Petitions has recommended.
It is vital to the construction and administration of a multinational community such as the EU that there should be no suspicions whatever of discrimination between candidates for posts in the administration, whether on national or other grounds.
I therefore thank the Ombudsman for his report, which I fully support.
I also thank the Commission for having agreed to follow the Ombudsman's recommendation to allow the candidates access to their marked tests in future competitions.
I call for all other institutions to follow this example.
Mr President, the Members of the Bonino List firmly support the Bösch report and, since I do not suffer from the ideological prejudices which often characterise the behaviour of certain elements of the Socialist Group towards us, I would like to thank the Group for the amendments which it has tabled.
They are extremely clear, concise, pragmatic amendments which represent genuine reform, that is, the only reform worthy of the name which the European institutions ought to adopt on the recruitment procedure.
However, between the fine words and noble principles expressed by the European Ombudsman and practice, things are not always so cut and dried.
When I tabled two questions to the Commission on the management and organisation of the last internal competition, I received clear, detailed replies.
These replies revealed a clear case of maladministration, if not abuse of authority, by the Director-General for Personnel and Administration, and the second reply implicated Commissioner Kinnock.
I notified the Ombudsman of this, who, in his reply, said that he had decided not to open an inquiry because the competition was already far advanced.
Unfortunately, I did not - and still do not - possess those paranormal capacities which make it possible to predict the future.
Not only that: Article 2(4) of the European Parliament Decision on the Regulations and the General Conditions governing the performance of the Ombudsman's duties stipulates that the Ombudsman must be notified within two years of the date on which the petitioner becomes aware of the grounds for the accusation.
Insofar as my duty and my political responsibilities are concerned, the Ombudsman's decision is a routine defence of the Commission. This is not the mandate that Parliament conferred upon Mr Söderman.
Mr President, before I begin may I also recommend that while they are replacing the wiring they could paint all the black walls white or some other colour.
May I begin by congratulating Mr Bösch on an excellent report and also congratulate the European Ombudsman on the work he is doing.
I know that, though this was before my day, there was concern in the House about whether to have an Ombudsman at all, because it would then seem like a conflict of interests.
But history has shown that this is not the case and that an Ombudsman does work very hard to protect the interests of our constituents and becomes a point of access for legitimising complaints and finding out what has gone wrong.
I had the privilege of serving on the select committee on the Ombudsman in the House of Commons and that was a very powerful committee.
We could summon anyone in the country before the Ombudsman committee, and the select committee procedure which I will discuss in two minutes is something that we could learn from.
Citizens of the European Union should receive a positive impression when encountering the Community institutions.
The question is, has this been achieved?
I fear that the short answer is: "no".
Clearly, as this report reflects, improvements are being made.
I congratulate the Commission on accepting the four recommendations made in the special report on the Ombudsman.
Access to official documents by citizens of the Union is a hallmark of a responsible and fully functioning democracy.
The fact that applicants for Community institution jobs should see their marked scripts shows that institutions are confident in the way they run their application and selection procedures.
It is a hallmark of a confident democracy if the processes by which selection is made is done openly and without any recourse to confidentiality or secrecy.
In the select committees of the House of Commons we had the power to introduce a regime of monitoring of every level of the executive, not only the ministers in the same way we monitor the Commission sometimes in terms of them coming here and answering questions, but a two-hour session with the particular minister with officials in attendance where the elected Members could ask questions and be prepared to ask questions in detail and to get detailed answers.
This is the beginning of opening up the process of government and making it transparent.
In our resolution we talk about transparent government and we should start to implement it in the European Parliament.
Mr President, I too should like to congratulate both the rapporteur and the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs.
However, congratulations must, of course, go first and foremost to Mr Södermann; he has been highly receptive to numerous complaints from European citizens about maladministration in the Commission recruitment procedure and has drafted an own-initiative report in order to solve the problem.
I am delighted that the Commission has accepted many of the Ombudsman's suggestions.
However, I think there is still one lacuna: it refuses to design a system of integrated principles with clear guidelines which would result in completely objective recruitment competitions.
This is the only way to limit arbitrariness and the resultant complaints - well-founded or not, that we do not know - about competitions with pre-determined results. Technical problems, however difficult, cannot obstruct the political objective of transparency.
If they could, there would be no point in even discussing transparency.
The President of the Commission himself has repeatedly assured us that transparency in the administration of European affairs is an absolute priority.
I do not believe, when he said this, that he was unaware of the difficulties in achieving this objective.
Allow me to finish by saying that the Commission has a obligation to comply with the recommendations of the European Ombudsman and to design a full system of objective examinations for two reasons: first, because it is legally obliged to do so under Article 255 of the Treaty, as revised by the Treaty of Amsterdam introducing the principle of transparency.
This is why we are calling on the Council to work with the Commission and issue the relevant directive.
And secondly, because, from a purely political point of view, its credibility depends on it.
Unlike the Member States, with their long history, the European Union has only a short past, which is why it must create the expectation of something new.
And the something new in this case is that it must apply best practices and avoid anything which experience tells us will damage its credibility within the Member States.
The European Union needs to give a greater impression of reliability than the Member States, which have different ties with their citizens, such as ties of common descent; the European Union's main link is the respect which the citizens of Europe expect of it.
Mr President, I should first of all like to congratulate Mr Bösch on his report, to which the Commission accords a favourable response.
A number of the requests contained in this have already been put into effect.
For example, candidates are already allowed to take the examination questions away with them, the general evaluation criteria can be made known to those candidates who request them, the list of passes can be published in the Official Journal and the composition of the selection board may be published in the Official Journal (in the case of general public entrance examinations) or on the Commission' s web site (in the case of internal or restricted examinations).
The Commission endeavours to be as objective as possible, and I should like to make two comments on a couple of questions which have arisen in the debate.
Firstly, the corrections to the examinations set by the Commission are always made anonymously.
No one knows who the candidates are, since they are identified by secret codes rather than by their names.
Secondly, and where languages are concerned, the examinations take place, and are marked in, the national languages, and the tests are not converted from one language to another before they are marked.
The aim, therefore, is to have the maximum amount of precautions and guarantees to ensure that the examinations take place in the form which is fairest and most acceptable to everyone.
Certainly, the point which created most interest today in the debate on Mr Bösch' s report concerned what happens regarding candidates' access to their marked examination scripts.
President Prodi has already made due reference to this subject.
I can now confirm something which has already appeared in the White Paper on reform of the Commission, specifically in action 29 which is about improving transparency in a way which benefits candidates and in which it is stated that 'Finally, pursuant to the European Ombudsman' s recommendation, the Commission will allow candidates access to their corrected tests in all competitions launched after July 2002' .
Why July 2002, some of you are asking. Well, precisely because of this same concern with transparency and knowledge of the procedures that you have expressed and also because a number of administrative steps will first have to be taken if there is to be access to corrected examination scripts.
What form is this correcting of examination papers to take?
Who is qualified to carry it out? How and to whom is this type of procedure to be presented?
The Commission' s commitment regarding this matter is absolute and we hope that, as soon as these measures have been implemented, they will be applied generally.
Finally, the Commission can obviously make a commitment on its own behalf.
With regard to other institutions, it is they themselves who will decide whether the procedures proposed in this report or in the requests by the Ombudsman are adopted.
Thank you, Commissioner.
That was a very satisfactory finish to a very satisfactory debate.
Mr President, this is not a question - clearly the matter does not fall within Commissioner Solbes' remit - but I take note of the statement that the examination scripts will be available as of July 2002.
Some months ago now, President Prodi declared that this option would be available for all competitions as of July 2000.
What does this mean?
That the famous reform has been postponed for two years?
No, Mr Turco, it means one or other of the following: either I made a mistake in reading out the text - obviously I was talking about 2000 - or else the interpreters made a mistake in translating it for me.
Obviously, I was talking about July 2000.
Mr President, on a point of order.
In his speech Mr Deva drew attention to the fact that in this House we are not very good at interrogating.
This was very obvious last night during Council Question Time.
The session actually finished early and yet Council questions have, it seems to me, become nothing other than an exercise in patronising evasion.
The impossibility of having more than one supplementary for a Member adds to this.
There is no sense of interrogation of the Council at all.
I should like to suggest that the Bureau at some time look into the question of whether a Member who limits a first supplementary to under half a minute is allowed a second question.
That is out of place at the close of this debate but maybe you would like to write to the Vice-President responsible for reforms to see if that can be incorporated in one way or another.
The debate is closed.
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 9 a.m.
(The sitting was closed at 7.12 p.m.)
Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting
The Minutes of yesterday' s sitting have been distributed.
Are there any comments?
Mr President, the French version of the Minutes for yesterday' s sitting state, on page 14, that we were to come back this morning to my request to postpone the voting on the Villiers report.
I think the time has now come to do so.
I proposed that we vote on the Villiers report in Brussels in November, because there are a number of rather sensitive amendments that I should not like to see voted in by random majorities.
That is something we shall discuss presently.
For the moment our business is to adopt the Minutes.
(The Minutes were approved)
VOTE
Once again, Mr President, yesterday I requested that the vote on Mrs Villiers' report be postponed.
It is a very important report which deserves better than to be discussed in an almost empty Chamber.
I do regret the fact that some Members see fit to avoid turning up to the Friday sitting in Strasbourg, but since it does happen, if we go ahead and vote today, the outcome is likely to be based on the will of a random majority, which does no credit to this House either.
The procedure requires us to hear the opinion of the Members of the House on this proposal.
We shall hear one speaker for the motion and one against.
Mr President, I would like to speak in favour of Mr Goebbels' proposal.
I leave this matter to the House.
It is for you to decide whether you would like to postpone or not.
Fridays in Strasbourg are a difficult issue for us, but today because of the sensitivity of the report - it raises issues about the general procedure of the House and our general relationship with the Commission - I personally think it would be better if the groups had an opportunity to vote when there were more Members present.
I am sorry that there are not more Members present this morning.
I would not ask this if I did not think that this was an important report which requires the attendance of more Members because we are taking important decisions.
I know that Fridays are a sensitive issue, so I leave it to the House.
But I personally would appeal to you to vote to postpone the vote on this report.
Now that we have heard from the rapporteur, we shall have one speaker in support of the motion, and one against.
Mr President, I came into politics in the hope of persuading people by argument and occasionally winning votes.
One way to win a vote is to turn up when your opponents do not.
If they are prevented by some unavoidable catastrophe that is a breach of democracy, but if they do not bother coming, they do not deserve the vote.
It is not the House that disenfranchises these voters, it is the Members who are not here.
Mr President, this is an issue of principle.
Nor did Mrs Villiers agree this with our group.
I nonetheless agree with Mrs Villiers that this is an important report. But, important though it is, it can still be voted upon on a Friday morning.
There is now just one more Friday sitting to come, namely in December.
I was against doing away with the Friday sittings.
However, that is something people have to sort out for themselves.
As long as we are in fact here in Strasbourg on Fridays, though, it is a full working day.
(Applause)
I would ask the whole of the Group of the European People's Party and European Democrats, as well as Mrs Villiers, to vote against postponement to the November II part-session.
That has not been agreed with my group.
Nor is it in order.
I would therefore ask that we vote here and now.
(Applause)
Mr Poettering, we had already had one speaker against the motion and I had no way of knowing, when I gave you the floor, what your position was going to be.
Is there no other speaker in favour of this motion to postpone the vote?
If not, we shall proceed to vote on the proposal.
(Parliament rejected the proposal to postpone the vote)
(Parliament adopted the resolution)
Report (A5-0293/2000) by Mrs Almeida Garrett, on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs, on the modification of Parliament' s decision of 9 March 1994 on the regulations governing performance of the Ombudsman' s duties
(Parliament adopted the resolution)
Report (A5-0280/2000) by Mr Bösch, on behalf of the Committee on Petitions, on the special report from the European Ombudsman to the European Parliament following the own-initiative inquiry into the secrecy which forms part of the Commission' s recruitment procedures (C5-0082/2000 - 2000/2048(COS))
(Parliament adopted the resolution)
EXPLANATIONS OF VOTES- Villiers Report (A5-0282/2000)
Mr President, I am afraid that I arrived too late to vote, and so I do not feel that I have the right to give an explanation of vote.
Mr Fatuzzo, your scrupulous respect for the procedure of the House does you great credit.
(IT) I voted for the Villiers report on the own funds of banks, for it is imperative for Directive 89/299/EEC, which regulated the matter a good 11 years ago, to be updated and supplemented.
I endorse the criteria of greater prudence adopted, but other aspects of the matter must also be taken into consideration, particularly the solvency ratio, which is a weighting factor according to the type of counter-party used to estimate the credit risk associated with a bank's assets.
In Italy, this is currently fixed at 8% - 7% for banking groups - of the weighted risk assets, for both cash and off-balance-sheet items.
What is totally unacceptable is for the supervisory authority - the Banca d'Italia - to have the power to establish a higher minimum requirement under certain conditions.
You do not change the rules during the game but before it starts.
I therefore agree that there should be a higher weighting coefficient - 10% for example - but it must be totally fixed in all cases and all circumstances.
Therefore, Article 53 (d) of Legislative Decree No 385/93, which deals with precisely this point, must be revoked, as all the Members States' laws which provide for changes a posteriori must be revoked.
- (DE) In assessing the Directive on the own funds of banks, a number of conflicting interests have to be carefully weighed against each other.
Those in favour of the directive can legitimately demand that their interests be protected, and mediation is required if a fair regulations are to be devised.
It is, in the first place, savers who could profit from harmonised EU-wide regulation because their investments would be protected against losses in accordance with identical criteria.
On the other side of the argument are the SMEs, which fear that regulation would make it difficult for them to raise credit because they would not be able to compete with the guarantees which large companies are able to provide.
As a result, there might be job losses in SMEs.
A second conflict of interests arises from the fact that, on the one hand, a fairly long transitional period is required in order to provide as many banks as possible, especially smaller institutions, with the opportunity to implement the necessary new regulations in their internal operations.
On the other hand, a delay in implementing the regulations favours American banks, which profit from the current set of regulations and are able to undercut European banks in Europe.
We must not allow our companies to be disadvantaged in this way, but without playing large European companies, powerful as they are, off against smaller ones, to the detriment of the latter.
We support the demand for a solution to be found to the conflict between the United States and the EU, produced by the discriminatory Gramm-Leach-Bliley legislation.
All in all, it may be said that the demand for European harmonisation is legitimate and that the latter would bring benefits to all sides in terms of security and fairness.
However, no one side ought, in the process, to be afforded an advantage at the expense of the others.
Provisional establishment of the European Police College (EPC)
The next item is the report (A5-0316/2000) Mr Posselt, on behalf of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, on the initiative of the Portuguese Republic with a view to adopting a Council Decision on the provisional establishment of the European Police College (EPC).
Mr President, we have spoken today about the importance and unimportance of reports.
I believe this is an important report, and I am therefore proud and happy that it is to be debated and voted upon on a Friday, for Friday is a working day like any other.
I am of the view that, as a European Parliament, we can also be proud of the fact that we have got the idea of a European Police College under way.
As you know, the idea came about in 1995 at a professional convention in Deggendorf in Lower Bavaria and was unanimously adopted in 1998 by this Parliament in the context of a report on internal security and eastward enlargement.
At the time, we were concerned with the important matter, which we are finding ever more pressing, of not only having to get the applicant countries ready economically for accession but also of having to ensure, above all, that the framework conditions in terms of democracy, constitutionality and administration were right.
On reading the latest progress reports, we note that there has been a considerable improvement in the way in which the legislation has been transposed.
However, the way in which the legislation is applied in the applicant countries is still problematic because it is huge task, after decades of dictatorship, to construct new police forces, new systems of justice and new public prosecution authorities.
In the report we produced at that time, we said that, in those countries which had found their way to democracy through their own efforts, we wanted, after decades of police States, to see the training of police who did not only genuinely accept the standards of European democracy but were also prepared to act in partnership.
That is how the idea of a European Police College for the Member States of the European Union and for the applicant countries arose.
This idea of Parliament's was then adopted at the Tampere Summit, and I am very grateful to the Council for adopting this project, originated by Parliament, as its own.
I am especially grateful to Commissioner Vitorino who has shown his vigorous commitment to a European Police College, something which also finds expression in the fact that the Portuguese government, which thinks along similar lines to himself, has thankfully seized this initiative.
In accordance with the will of the Council and of that of this Parliament's Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, the European Police College is to become a reality as early as next year, more precisely as part of a network of national police training institutes with a joint remit, joint leadership and joint training programmes.
However, we want this only to be a first step and we want an actual Police College to be set up within no more than two or three years.
In this context, I should like to refer to a valuable comment by the French Presidency of the Council which said that we need a common, actually existing Police College of this kind in order to create a European culture of police training.
Joint training of this kind is urgently needed when it comes to protecting external borders and combating cross-border crime and also when it comes to applying human rights standards in the European Union.
It also has very wide support from police trade unions and professional associations.
They know that, in the border area between the current EU and the applicant countries, such as in Eastern Bavaria, a great many towns have already asked for such a Police College.
I am of the view, however, that it is still too early to make a decision on the matter.
Naturally, that would be the best place for it to be located.
It is now firstly a question, however, of actually creating this Police College, and all political forces are together helping to achieve this goal.
I would thank the Bavarian and German ministers of the interior, as well as former Austrian Minister of the Interior Schlögel, who together made this possible back in Tampere.
I believe this is a one-off opportunity to create a Europe in practical terms, namely a constitutional Europe that does not just exist in some documents or other but finds expression on an everyday basis.
As the European Parliament, we can be proud that this is one of our own ideas and initiatives, which is to become a reality in just a few months' time.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, first of all, I wish to congratulate the rapporteur, Mr Posselt, on the excellent work he has carried out on this initiative for the provisional creation of the European Police College.
This is a cause to which he has demonstrated his ongoing and productive commitment.
We have before us a very useful instrument which will allow us not only to optimise police cooperation between Member States but also to improve cooperation with candidate countries and with Norway and Iceland.
This police cooperation is crucial if we are to achieve the very important objective of affording European citizens a high degree of security within the European area of freedom, security and justice.
The intention of the Portuguese Presidency in presenting this initiative, following the Tampere conclusions and in order to meet the deadlines laid down in the 'scoreboard' , was to initiate the preliminary stage of the European Police College by creating a network of the national institutes already existent in each Member State in order to improve the training of senior police officers.
In so doing, we are beginning to train the next generation of police officers to work and operate throughout Europe; in other words, we will be preparing them to implement Community law and joint and Community actions.
This will be a kind of virtual police academy, whose task will be to improve mutual familiarity with the Member States' national police systems and structures, to increase familiarity with international instruments and to optimise cooperation and coordination between the College and the other European multinational police training institutes.
We have no doubt that it will be easier to reach consensus at this first stage.
The transition to the second stage, that is, the institutional and physical creation of the future European Police College, is bound to raise some problems.
We know that there are still a number of Member States that support the creation of the College only as a permanent network of national institutes, but we feel that the majority will accept this proposal as a temporary stage that will make it possible to create a tangible institution within a maximum of three years.
This is also the proposal that the Commission supports, which has been so vigorously advocated by Commissioner Vitorino.
This is also the position advocated by the rapporteur, and it is shared by the European People' s Party.
The rapporteur goes even further, proposing that the deadline should be brought forward to two years; as soon as the proposed objectives can be achieved, it would certainly be in the common interest to be able to relax the deadlines in order to give substance to the area of freedom, security and justice.
Mr President, I would like to thank Commissioner Vitorino for being present here today for the debate on two, in my view, important reports from the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs.
As regards the report by Mr Posselt, who has done some sterling work, it is a fact that judicial and police cooperation is new territory for the European Union and that every proposal that comes up for discussion marks progress.
The Tampere conclusions clearly expressed the need to set up a European Police College.
I believe that the amendments adopted by the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs have enriched the proposal put forward by the Portuguese Presidency.
For example, we believe that police training should not be confined to cross-border police cooperation and to combating crime, but should cover other areas of policy, such as human rights, the provision of services to citizens, the use of new technologies, non-repressive law enforcement, crime prevention methods, respect for the rule of law, and knowledge of the political and socio-economic developments in the European Union.
In all these areas, the police college can play an important role by promoting more effective practices and up-to-date methods, either in the form of a network coordinating national training establishments, or as an actual college with a permanent seat.
Naturally priority should be given to the countries with which the European Union is conducting accession negotiations.
The enlargement of the European Union, which will extend the space in which citizens are free to move, should be accompanied by supplementary measures ensuring safety and peaceful co-existence among the Member States.
The candidate countries must not delay their full integration in the third pillar of justice and home affairs.
To this end, they must establish specific frameworks for cooperation between the European Police College and the police forces in their own countries.
I would like to stress that the European Parliament has an exclusively advisory role in all this.
But the establishment of new European infrastructures will necessarily impact on the lives of its citizens, especially in relation to matters of policing.
That is why I would like to call on the Council, which I believe is absent today, to carefully study the amendments we have tabled and to pay serious attention to the opinion of the European Parliament.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, like the previous speakers, I hope that this initiative will not be seen as the umpteenth European organisation, but that people will take this initiative seriously and, as a consequence, will give it enough of a chance.
I just have a few reservations with regard to the name.
The term 'police academy' makes me think of a humorous American TV series about the police.
What is more, I find the word 'academy' is not assertive enough when it comes to police operations.
That is just a minor detail, of course.
I think that it is more important to confine ourselves to the essentials.
Social conditions in most Member States of the European Union are now such that there is indeed a great need for cross-border cooperation between the various police forces.
Cross-border cooperation can only lead to results if a number of conditions are met, if the greatest care is taken over appropriate, goal-directed programmes for ongoing training, if attention is paid to training regarding the Member States' response to crisis situations in third countries and if exchanges and secondments are made possible in a professional way, with the emphasis on the professional aspect.
Special attention must also be paid to training at European level with regard to crime prevention, maintenance of public order and efficient border control.
On the other hand, a European Police College needs to become the forum for gaining an understanding of the various national police systems and defending the knowledge they have.
In short, I hope that there will be no delay in giving concrete expression to this initiative which, to my mind and also in my Group's opinion, answers the need to bring about a European training structure.
Mr President, if there is one thing I have learnt about constituency problems since I was elected to the House, it is how very variable throughout Europe is the interpretation of Articles 5 and 6 of the European Convention on Human Rights - the right to brief detention before trial and the right to a speedy trial, the right to be released pending trial if the trial cannot proceed speedily.
These rights are very differently interpreted in different parts of the Union.
I come from a country in which the maximum period of detention allowed by law is 110 days.
After 110 days of detention a person, if not tried, must be released and never tried for that offence again.
From what I see, conditions in French and Portuguese jails are very different.
People can be kept for enormously long periods of time awaiting trial.
We do not really have a common culture in Europe on these important points.
This connects exactly to our culture of policing.
Do we have a culture of policing in which the idea is to detain people as briefly as necessary, find the evidence as quickly and expeditiously as possible and get trials moving forward, or do we have a system where people do it as it suits them best?
If we could develop a common culture of policing in Europe, and if it were based on best practice, then that would be a fine thing.
But, as I have said in another debate this week, the danger is that we develop a kind of general casualness, we have moved to the lowest common denominator, not the highest common factor.
Let us make sure that if we have a police college it is, as Mr Posselt's report stresses, grounded in the need to develop and enhance respect for human and civil rights in our police culture.
Police efficiency is not just to do with grabbing guys and putting them inside.
It is to do with finding the people who actually commit crimes and proving the case against them in a civilised way, with a proper connection between prosecution services and police services.
If we can get a police college for the whole of Europe to do that or begin to develop this kind of common culture that would be a very good thing.
The majority of those who have spoken so far seem to think that it is vital to have a single permanent seat for the college.
I see the need for a permanent seat for its administration but I want Members of the House to think seriously about whether, in the interest of a common police culture in Europe, it would be better to take everybody to one place or to have courses which move year-by-year or subject-by-subject to different police colleges and academies in different parts of the Union.
That way, people begin to appreciate differences of local assumption, differences of local approach.
We hope that over time our police forces will genuinely learn from each other and learn best practice from each other, not worst practice.
If that could be done we would have a police academy of which we, as Europeans, might be proud.
I hope that will be the result of this excellent proposal and this excellent report.
Mr President, in itself there is nothing to object to in the basic idea of creating a European Police College, whether it exists in virtual reality or is established with a permanent seat somewhere.
The questions arise, however, of what this College is for and of what tasks and objectives it has.
To take just one point, Mr Posselt writes of 'providing training sessions for senior national police officers on the basis of common standards'.
That is when things already begin to get difficult.
What are these common standards?
As you know, Mr Posselt, police duties in the Federal Republic of Germany are a matter for the individual Länder, which are absolutely sovereign in this area. Now, compare the various Länder' s laws on police duties.
You will see that, in Brandenburg (unlike in Berlin), de-escalation is the supreme precept when it comes to deploying police and that, under Brandenburg law, any police who are to be deployed are obliged to be identified by name so that anyone who might be attacked in a demonstration can read the name of the policeman concerned and know who it was.
In other words, if you want common standards, you have to start by defining these. Otherwise, you end up with training that may be completely different in form from area to area.
A College along these lines is not really needed just for the purpose of exchanging different types of experience.
You speak about establishing public order.
All right, that is accepted.
Again, the only question is, with what resources?
In the Federal Republic of Germany, even public order is defined completely differently in the various Länder' s laws relating to police duties.
What do you understand to mean by public order?
You write in your report about border control services.
I ask you!
We make a perfectly clear distinction between duties relating to the protection of Federal borders and the duties of the police. (In other States, it is different.)
If you write in those terms, then before what you say can be approved, it must first be clear what common activities are planned and according to what standards one is going to proceed.
As long as such matters have not been clarified, I have to say to you in all honesty that I myself cannot consent to the basic idea.
Mr President, this is a film which we have already seen once and which we did not enjoy.
Yet another interim but not so short-term decision, another little present to Parliament from the Council.
Just as Europol grew out of the "Drugs" unit, so the seed of judicial cooperation will produce Eurojust and maybe a European prosecution service.
We can therefore safely say that a lightweight and currently practically non-existent structure such as the European Police College will give rise to yet another bureaucratic structure, almost as if it were in the genetic code of the European Union to entwine policies in red tape.
It is clear, blindingly obvious and even banal to state that it is necessary to fight organised crime operating at transnational level with transnational policies, just as it goes without saying that national police forces need to be trained in order to be better equipped to tackle the cultural, legal and linguistic crime issues raised by both European integration and the integration of criminal organisations.
Nevertheless, we do not feel that this makes it necessary to create a new structure.
The underlying reasons for establishing a police college - reasons which we endorse - could have been better and more effectively achieved by encouraging existing national academies to develop training courses, exchanges, MA courses and specialisations to fill the gap which does, in effect, exist.
Having said this, the fact remains that Mr Posselt's work is, in our opinion, excellent.
On the other hand, we fail to understand the position of the Socialist Members.
Mrs Karamanou has just stated that she welcomes the fact that Parliament will have an advisory role, and yet, only the other day, the Group of the Party of European Socialists voted against a motion on the grounds that the Europol Management Board was to include Members of Parliament with the right to vote.
However, Mr Posselt's work has resulted in provision at last being made for police training to include human rights and the right of defence, and the proposal is also important and appropriate at the moment to create a virtual police college which would take advantage of the potential offered by the Internet.
In general, instead of taking advantage of the new economy to develop a new policy of employment structures and organisation, the European Union is still trying to work and organise itself according to last century's criteria.
We will vote for the amendments but against the legislative resolution.
Mr President, according to the Council decision on the establishment of the European police college, the aim of the EPC is to help train senior law enforcement officers of the Member States.
I note that the rapporteur wants to change "law enforcement officers" to "police", which is probably a good idea.
But what also caught my eye is that this training is aimed at supporting and developing a European approach in the field of crime-fighting and protecting internal security.
The rapporteur wishes to see added crime prevention, provision of services, innovation and border surveillance and also wants internal security modified to include maintaining law and order.
The problem I have with these statements is that I am not quite sure what the European approach to maintaining law and order, etc, actually involves.
It is not specified in either the Council decision or the rapporteur's report.
All I can say, from a strictly British perspective, is that if this means that continental practices are to become de rigeur throughout Europe, our own police force will be taking an unhealthy interest in armoured cars, water cannon, tear-gas launchers and dinky little pistols which they can swing from their already over-laden belts.
This apart, it is something of a surprise to find that there is even such a thing as a European approach to crime fighting.
I am absolutely certain that it will come as a rude shock to most of the British population that internal security is an area where there is any room for involvement of the European Union.
It will probably come as an even greater shock for them to learn that the European Parliament wants the European police college to be responsible for training police forces and border control forces - that is to say customs and excise - in order to prepare them for the use of Community law and the implementation of common and Community measures.
There it is: Community law and common and Community measures. The cat is out of the bag.
Clear as day we can see the ambition of the EU naked in tooth and claw; a common approach - the European approach - to fighting crime and internal security; one people, one law and one police force.
I am sure that the European Union will be far more subtle than this.
Our police force will retain their uniforms, right down to the comforting woolly pullies that they have taken to wearing.
The ranks will be the same and the local badges will be untouched.
From all the outward signs the facade will be unchanged but, under the expert tutelage of the European college, they will be working to a different agenda: a European agenda, applying Community law and Community measures.
That is such a far cry from the Common Market which the United Kingdom joined in 1973.
No-one in the UK would ever have believed a soothsayer from that period who warned that it would all end up in Dixon of Dock Green whistling "Ode to Joy" and working out how to apply the European approach to policing down at the nick.
But here we are in Strasbourg in a near-deserted Chamber hearing that which is almost unbelievable.
Our own Prime Minister, Mr Tony Blair, his Foreign Secretary, Mr Cook and other British ministers may deny that a superstate is on its way, but when I hear proposals for our own police forces to be trained in a European approach to crime fighting and internal security, it is obvious that the writing is on the wall.
As you can probably gather, I will not be supporting this report.
Mr President, listening to the last speaker, I have not heard mention of the common market in almost 20 years in this House.
If he reads the records of some of the representatives from his own Member State, the United Kingdom, in those days they were extreme left-wing socialists who forecast everything which seems to scare him with the same hysterical sort of attitude to European Union. They forecast all the things which seem to frighten him today.
Coming from a different part of the political spectrum, it is very interesting to hear him repeat, with the same hysteria, the same concerns.
Their capital in those days was Moscow or Budapest.
Those were the ideals that they proposed to us and that was the sort of state that they worked for.
However, I am glad to say that attitudes in the Labour party in Britain have changed.
I want to thank Mr Posselt for his report.
The work we do on a Friday morning in Parliament has the same legitimacy as the work we do on a Monday or any other day.
Indeed it was commented that on Wednesday evening when the Commissioner spoke about BSE, somebody drew attention to the fact that there were only 17 people in the House.
There are a lot more people here this morning and I will regret the passing of Friday when we can carry on a real debate and respond to each other and take the time to listen to each other.
Parliament and democracy in Europe will be the poorer for the shortening of the Strasbourg week.
Having said that, I welcome this proposal.
Parliament can be proud that the proposal to set up this academy originated here, and we are grateful to the Portuguese presidency for taking it up and the Commission and Council for their support.
It is a good idea and in the European Union where people have freedom of movement, freedom of trade and the right of establishment, where travellers from Scotland can go to Sicily or Greece, it is only logical to expect to develop a common system of maintaining the rule of law.
That common approach is not there at the moment.
I come from a state where the police developed out of a chaotic situation - a civil war.
But the people at that time established, very wisely, an unarmed police force that is very socially engaged with the communities in which they live and work.
You might call them a soft police force but they did succeed in healing the wounds of a civil war and in bringing credibility to the idea of law and order.
When I come to continental Europe I am a bit surprised at the way police distance themselves and adopt what appears to be a harder attitude.
I will welcome a levelling-out of standards in some Member States in the European Union.
All of us have experienced abuses in our own countries.
I hope that this academy will help us to have a better understanding of the whole system.
Mr President, there are powerful criminals who think that there are no laws which apply to them and who take advantage of everyone.
Ever since border controls within the European Union disappeared, they also no longer take any notice of state boundaries.
Cross-border crime requires a cross-border approach.
Because everyone agrees about that, closer cooperation between the police from the different Member States and their regions has already been worked on for years.
Three days ago, following publication of the Marinho, Karamanou and Roure reports, I pointed to the dangers attached to this.
An enlarged and centralised police force, disconnected from its surroundings, will look for its own priorities.
The idea of a European Police College is based on the assumption that there is agreement on the tasks and modus operandi of the police.
We see that the police in one country react totally differently to the same situation than the police in another country.
In the Netherlands, the police are trained in the de-escalation of conflicts and in repressive tolerance whereby the existence of subcultures and ethnic minorities, the organisation of political protest and the use of churches as ports of refuge for illegal immigrants are seen as normal social phenomena.
I am under the impression that, in some other countries, violence is still used as a method of winning prestige, on behalf of the government, in combating everything that can cause unrest.
This week, the contribution made by President De Gaulle to establishing peace in Algeria was held up by Mr Posselt as a model for the role which Mr Kostunica will have to play in order to solve the Kosovo problem.
He also cited the situation in which Hitler could claim that he could exterminate the Jews without being punished because, after all, nobody remembered the mass murder of the Armenians any more.
At such moments, I can agree with Mr Posselt to a very large extent.
On the other hand, we shall probably remain permanently in disagreement about the vision for the police.
I would prefer a small-scale, trained and organised police force, constantly driven by signals from the society within which it must function.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the creation of the European Police College is, in the Commission' s opinion, a dossier of major importance for the European Union, both in terms of cooperation in the field of Justice and Home Affairs and with the prospect of enlargement of the Union.
From the first discussions on this dossier, which were held at European level at the initiative of the European Parliament, the Commission has given a commitment to the Member States to pursue a course of action designed to develop what we might call a European police culture, grounded in the highest standards of duty, respect for the rights and freedoms of our citizens and efficiency in the fight against crime.
The Commission welcomes the rapid progress made both by the Portuguese Presidency, which launched this initiative, and by the French Presidency, which intends to adopt it by the end of the year.
I therefore feel that the efforts made by us all will have made it possible to effectively create the European Police College just one year after the decision taken by the Tampere European Council.
I should also like to congratulate and thank the European Parliament' s Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, and particularly its rapporteur, Mr Posselt, not only for his personal commitment but also for the excellent study that he has produced and for the way in which he has pushed for the creation of the European Police College.
With regard to the future of the College, the Commission is - as I am sure you will be aware - of the opinion that Conclusion No 47 of the Tampere European Council laid down, extremely clearly, that the network-style functioning of the College, which is already causing it also to be called a 'virtual' Academy, will be only the first stage.
Like the European Parliament, the Commission feels that it would be desirable for a formula to be adopted within a practical and clearly defined timescale, ensuring greater continuity of training action or even its development beyond the senior police officers.
I also wish to make it clear, however, that what we are talking about here is not the creation of a European police force.
We are talking about the need to exchange experience and information, to exchange best practices in crime fighting in order to make respect for citizens' rights and the fight against transnational crime more effective.
Above all, I wish to emphasise that, as someone who has always advocated the idea of community policing, which is the method employed in the United Kingdom, I would welcome the fact that this British idea is finding ever more support in a range of countries in so-called "continental Europe" .
Whoever believes that the solutions that they advocate are good should not have anything to fear from exposure to other people' s solutions.
The Commission feels that the transition from a virtual police academy or police staff college to a police academy as an institution is not only justified from the point of view of the operational ability of the current Member States' police forces.
It is also justified from the point of view of being able, as early as possible, to systematically include the police forces of the candidate countries in a training strategy.
I consider this to be an extremely important priority, not only for the candidate countries but also to ensure that the guarantees that we have to provide for our citizens that enlargement will be accompanied by safeguards for the security of Member States.
I should like to assure Parliament that the Commission is willing to continue to cooperate, both with regard to creating the Academy and to ensuring its smooth operation.
I have noted Mr Posselt' s proposal that, in 2003, the Commission could draw up a report on the College' s future, on the basis of a study produced by its management board.
The Commission is prepared to undertake this task if that is what is decided.
Nevertheless, I do not think that this is the idea that Council currently has in mind.
The Council wishes the Police College to develop primarily with an intergovernmental approach.
Our priority is to see actions in the field of training launched as quickly as possible.
The fact that the Commission is not playing a central role in this process, however, does not mean that we will not be paying close attention to the process, doing all that we can to ensure that it is a success, and I am convinced that this project will help to improve security in the area of freedom, security and justice, since freedom and justice can only exist in an environment of genuine security.
Mr President, in connection with the European Police College, I would point out that what is particularly important is to combat crime in the cities.
As MEPs, we ourselves are very often concerned by crime.
I hope that, in this area, the College will provide a starting point for the future.
The establishment of the European Police College is one more step towards the creation of a police state at a European level, which the ruling class believes is necessary to protect its interests from the demands of ordinary people.
Combating crime is simply a pretext.
The establishment of the European Police College is in keeping with the decision taken by the Feira Council to create a mobile 'expeditionary' force of repression with police, judicial and correctional powers, which the European Union will use for 'non-military crisis management' anywhere on the planet.
It is especially important to stress that the European Police College, which is expected to start its operations on 1 January 2001, is not simply a network of the national training institutes of the Member States of the European Union; it also involves the applicant countries of Central and Eastern Europe.
Indeed, for greater effectiveness its permanent seat will be close to the border between the current European Union and the applicant countries.
For these reasons, the Members of the European Parliament from the Communist Party of Greece will be voting against the report.
. (FR) Following on from the special Council meeting in Tampere, the Portuguese Presidency tabled an initiative in June this year with a view to adopting a Council Decision on establishing a European Police College.
We find the objectives of the proposal are excellent: to establish training programmes for senior officials and staff in the police forces of Member States, but also applicant countries, in all crime-fighting areas necessitating cross-border cooperation.
We also think the method adopted for this initiative is perfectly appropriate: we are not going to set up a new European structure liable to be rather divorced from reality at the national level, but rather to create a College in the form of a network made up of the existing national training institutes for senior police officers.
Each national unit would accommodate one section of the European Police College.
In this way, the College would not be based in any one place, but would be present everywhere.
Its governing board would be made up of all the directors of the national institutes, who would therefore have the benefit of full knowledge of the facts when determining their requirements.
This arrangement would guarantee the College' s remaining permanently close to grass-roots developments, avoiding any divergence between the approach of the college and that of the national technical experts to actual problems.
Moreover, it would be flexible in its organisation, offering great potential for development, with the possibility of training programmes being held at the best qualified national institute for each aspect.
This is a good illustration of what we are starting to call 'Network Europe' , a Europe which puts nations in contact with each other directly, without the need to maintain pointless superstructures.
Unfortunately, this instrument, which we find perfectly satisfactory, does not seem to appeal greatly to the European Parliament.
The amendments tabled by the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs are pushing in the opposite direction, emphasising that this is a temporary structure, that the time period for revision must be short, and that a permanent headquarters must be found for the organisation.
At this rate, there is a great danger that, in a few years' time, we will find ourselves with a new costly superstructure that thinks itself superior to the national services, that does not cooperate well with them and ends up not being efficient enough.
According to what I have been told, this is the route that Europol is going to go down if we do not soon take steps to change its course.
In our opinion, the most effective way of working, for the European Police College, as for most of the other areas of cooperation, especially in the police, justice and security sector, is to establish networks between the existing national services.
- (SV) I have voted against the report on the provisional establishment of the European Police College.
In the EU, there is an obvious risk of believing, in area after area, that cooperation is advanced simply through establishing new institutions and authorities.
I also object to the fact that the text of recital 7 in the report goes above and beyond the Portuguese Republic's text in demanding one special seat for the Police College instead of cooperation on a rota basis.
The fact that police powers are proposed in a number of recitals under the directive, together with the fact that common curricula are proposed, I see as moves towards centralisation, with the risk of bad practice getting the better of good practice.
Rights of access to children
The next item is the report (A5-0311/2000) by Mrs Banotti, on behalf of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, on the initiative of the French Republic with a view to adopting a Council Regulation on the mutual enforcement of judgements on rights of access to children (9735/2000 - C5-0397/2000 - 2000/0818(CNS)).
Mr President, for over six years I have had the honour of being the special mediator for the European Parliament for transnationally abducted children.
This role was first developed by President Plumb, following a request from many women in France whose children had been abducted and with whom they were no longer in contact.
They were seeking Parliament's help.
Since then, many other people have also sought the help of the European Parliament when their children have been abducted.
I have worked on these issues for over six years and, very much thanks to the help and resources of the European Parliament, have had several significant successes in recovering children who have been abducted.
Most of the cases of child abduction are actually handled very efficiently and appropriately by the central authorities in all Member States.
Unfortunately, I generally find myself dealing with the more complex cases.
At the heart of this regulation, which has been essentially rushed through during the French presidency, is the question of access to children by non-custodial parents.
It has already been dubbed "the Brussels 3" issue, not so much a directive as a regulation.
As such, it has the limitations of the Brussels 2 Convention, but also some of its strengths.
It refers exclusively to children of couples who have married. It refers to children under the age of 16.
It is also a directive whose scope has been described as both modest and pragmatic - and indeed it is a modest little regulation.
The precise scope of it would cover parents, living in a different Member State from where the guardianship judgment was made, who were looking for visiting rights.
It would allow the child to be brought to another Member State for a limited period in order for the visiting right to be exercised.
Crucial to its operation would be the principle that a judgment made on visiting rights in one Member State is recognised throughout the EU.
An exception to this principle would be if the guardian parent proves that, due to new circumstances, the visit would endanger the physical and moral health of the child.
Undoubtedly, this regulation will work in tandem with the Hague Convention on the transnational abduction of children.
It does not seek to impose on other Member States the existing law of one Member State; it is simply an attempt at mutual enforcement of these custody orders.
There are constitutional concerns in some Member States, notably Germany and Austria.
There is concern that the applicant parent can apply for access to the child, with only eight days for the other parent to respond to the request.
Undoubtedly, many of our courts are very slow and ponderous, and there is great difficulty in getting them to act quickly on these issues.
There is also concern about the forcible return of a child.
My belief is that the existence of good law, applicable in all Member States, has had a significant effect in reducing the number of abductions of children.
Hopefully, this is what this regulation will ensure between Member States.
Unfortunately, it does not apply outside the European Union, and there are fears that it will cut across the Hague Convention.
But the Council of Ministers will discuss this, and I recommend its acceptance to the House.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I wish to begin by congratulating Mrs Banotti on both her excellent report and the efforts she has made over recent years in the cause of defending and guaranteeing the fundamental rights of children, specifically in her capacity as European Parliament mediator on issues concerning the international abduction of children, a task in which she has invested her widely-acknowledged qualities and sensitivity.
The French initiative warrants a favourable welcome.
It is part of the gradual development of judicial cooperation in civil matters and its communitisation.
It is a proposal for a regulation that seeks to make exercising rights of access and accommodation for the children of separated parents easier, in an attempt to prevent children becoming a kind of hostage in the dispute between parents who are resident in different Member States.
In these cases, situations unfortunately often occur that correspond to the cycle of love, hate and the desire for revenge of one or both of the parents.
Hence the need for speed in order to protect the well-being of the children and, sometimes, their very safety.
In a Europe in which its citizens are able to move around freely, regardless of their State of origin, one can easily understand the ease with which family ties are established between people of different nationalities or who are resident in different countries.
It is also understandable that lawsuits arise, specifically divorces and the regulation of parental power, which could lead to problems with regard to the exercise of rights of access when the child lives in another country, as in cases of abduction, particularly when the child is not returned by the parent who holds rights of access within the specified time.
This regulation establishes the principle of mutual recognition of judgments for rights of access to children without any intermediary steps and limits the possibilities for seeking the suspension of the enforcement of such judgments.
In this way, the regulation responds to the need for a direct application of uniform rules on such important issues as the regulation of parental power and the exercise of visiting rights.
We are thereby improving Community spirit and European citizenship.
It is nevertheless a matter for regret that the scope of this regulation is limited, since it does not cover the families of unmarried couples, in which there are children born outside of marriage, whose rights will not, as a result, be recognised and enforced under Community law.
Now, this is a very common situation in our states.
According to the latest statistics produced by Eurostat, in 1998, 26% of all births in the Union took place outside marriage and these numbers are continuing to increase.
It is therefore crucial that this loophole must be plugged for reasons of fairness, of realism given the way society is changing and for the sake of equal rights and obligations for all of the European Union' s citizens.
I wish to say in conclusion that I support the amendment proposed by the rapporteur in Article 1, in which it must be specified that the period of access should not be less than one day.
In particular, we must take account of the fact that situations sometimes occur in which the parent comes from the other side of the Union, travelling thousands of kilometres, and so it is pointless to do this for a visit limited to one hour.
This is ridiculous.
Maintaining relations with both parents is an essential part of the child's upbringing and the development of his or her personality.
Mr President, Commissioner, I would first of all like to congratulate both the French Republic on its initiative to adopt a regulation to guarantee the right of personal contact between parents and their children and our rapporteur, Mrs Banotti, whose expertise added considerable value to the French proposal.
A Europe without borders has most certainly contributed to an increase in the number of marriages between couples with different nationalities from both the E.U. and third countries.
But when such marriages break down, there are often problems of ensuring personal contact between children and one of the parents, especially when the children reside in another Member State.
And, as previous speakers have already pointed out, there has also been an increase in the number of cases of abduction with the child not being returned by one of the parents.
That is why this regulation, which seeks to simplify the enforcement of rights of the parents with the aim of ensuring that children are able to maintain regular contact with both parents, is of major significance.
The regulation which has been put forward is by no means perfect as it is linked to the Brussels II Regulation, which does not cover children whose parents are living apart and children of unmarried parents.
Mr Coelho gave some very pertinent statistics and, personally, I think it is an unacceptable anachronism that, in the Europe of the twenty-first century, we legislate simply with regard to conventionally legitimate children and institutionalised human relations and that we significantly limit the scope of a regulation which is good in all other respects.
I believe that there is a need for an immediate review of all regulations based on standards which have been overtaken by life and by contemporary reality.
It is also necessary to take the forthcoming enlargement of the European Union more seriously into account when hammering out regulations and to give more serious consideration to the repeatedly expressed views and positions of the European Parliament.
Mr President, my group wishes to join in the support for this initiative and for Mrs Banotti's report and indeed to join in the tributes to Mrs Banotti for the enormously valuable work she does as our mediator for transnationally abducted children.
There is no doubt that split families are among the most harrowing things we hear of in our working life: mothers or fathers worried about access to children across national boundaries.
Whatever we can do to alleviate these situations, we ought to do and this regulation brought forward on a French initiative is the way forward.
I agree with Mrs Karamanou and others that it is a great pity, given the way we live now, that it only covers the children of people who happen to be, or have been, married to each other.
That is a task for the future.
Meantime, we welcome this measure and we will vote heartily for it.
Mr President, these days divorce is no longer the exception.
Often, couples go their separate ways in a civilised manner.
They find it unpleasant to continue sharing each other's lives, but they do not start hating their ex-partner.
Unfortunately, others separate on the basis of accumulated hatred.
Parents who separate on that basis are a disaster for their children who become victims of that insoluble conflict.
One parent wants the absolute power of decision over the children in order to exclude the other parent forever.
Everyone is familiar with the awful situation in which the parent to whom custody of the child is awarded, often the mother, tries to make contact with the other parent impossible.
We also recognise the equally terrible situation in which the other parent, often the father, abducts the child and makes him or her untraceable.
Children remember that sort of occurrence for their whole lives.
My mother lived through such a separation and abduction 85 years ago, and she still talks about it.
Mrs Banotti has tried to make creative use of all the possibilities for securing effective arrangements for parental access on a cross-border basis too.
She is trying to preclude all situations in which parents can misuse the existence of different rules of law in the Member States of the European Union in order to delay or prevent effective arrangements for parental access.
A part of her solution involves drastically curtailing the right to call in a judge in order to overturn a foreign court order.
That regulation will only work if both parents are nationals of an EU country or are resident within the European Union and if their relationship was confirmed by a legal marriage.
Only a part of the problem will be solved, but a precedent will be created.
If we also start applying something similar to other situations, we are undertaking in the future to have centralised unitary legislation such as does not even exist between the 50 States of the United States.
That is why I see drawbacks.
But I have many more objections to tackling legal weaknesses and setting precedents in ways that leave social problems permanently unsolved.
Because we support the goal that has been set, we are voting for the proposed measures.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I should like, first of all, to congratulate Mrs Banotti on her excellent report, which is part of thorough, ongoing work on protecting and guaranteeing children' s rights.
As the House knows, the Commission and the Council have the firm intention of adopting a programme of mutual recognition of judgments in civil matters by the end of the year.
Priority was specifically given in this programme to family disputes, as laid down by the Tampere European Council.
The French government' s initiative is the first practical step towards this.
I should like to emphasise that, although this report and this subject are being discussed on a Friday morning, I hope that the media, which so often says that European debates have nothing to do with the everyday lives of our citizens, understands that, on this occasion, with this subject, we are addressing an issue that affects not only the life but also the hearts of Europe' s citizens.
In May, we adopted a regulation incorporating the Brussels II Convention into Community law.
This regulation simplifies and clarifies rules on defining the competent court and the relevant law for regulating divorces, separations and the allocation of parental control.
This French initiative therefore refers to the scope of the Brussels II Regulation and is, if I may put it this way, a revolutionary initiative.
I say this because, for the first time, it enshrines the abolition of the exequatur for the automatic recognition of a judgment by a court in a Member State by the legal system of another Member State.
While it is true, however, that it is a great step forward from this point of view, I also share the opinion of Mrs Banotti and other honourable Members that it is deplorable that the scope of this regulation should be limited to the protection of children of marriages that are recognised as such by the law.
This fact is bound by the scope of the Brussels II legislation itself.
What I therefore wish to tell Parliament is that, in the action programme on the mutual recognition of judgments in civil matters - which we hope will be adopted by the end of this year - the Commission proposes that the first and utmost priority should be given to extending the scope of the Brussels II regulation and, consequently, of this regulation on rights of access, covering both the children of married couples and those of unmarried couples without discrimination.
With regard to the content of the document - as you know, this is not a Commission initiative - I should simply like to make three observations.
The first is that we are working together with the Council in order to improve the text, specifically with regard to its most complex issue, which is the delicate balance between the need to guarantee that the child will be returned immediately after the visit, and also the need to safeguard the possibility of guaranteeing protection of the child whenever this should prove necessary.
We are addressing a tragic issue here, that of the abduction or improper withholding of children, which is, unfortunately, much more common than we might think.
It is difficult to find this balance, but we are convinced that it will be possible, with the help of your amendments and with the climate of dialogue that exists with the Council, to reach a solution that is both technically flawless and, above all, workable.
With regard to the amendments, I wish to emphasise that the Commission has some difficulties with Amendment No 1, tabled by Mrs Banotti, because this is not merely a procedural amendment, but an amendment that takes us into the field of the harmonisation of substantive family law, establishing a lower limit of one day for the exercising of rights of access.
I am sure that the intention behind this amendment is valid, but it could have harmful effects if we consider that courts will only grant rights of access when they feel that this must be for a whole day.
There are solutions in which the courts grant rights of access for a period of less than a day for reasons to do with the protection of the child itself.
I feel that we should lay down an indicative criterion but not a legal obligation, trusting judges who are called on to apply the law to be reasonable enough to guarantee that the rights of access they grant are effective.
I should also like to say that although this is not the subject of a direct amendment by Mrs Banotti, the Commission has difficulties with the amendment to Article 17 of the regulation proposed by the French Government.
We have difficulties with this because we feel that this article places too much emphasis on the purely intergovernmental origins of judicial cooperation.
It is worth saying, however, that the issue of civil judicial cooperation was communitised by the Treaty of Amsterdam.
Therefore, the functioning of the committee that Article 17 is challenging should not be purely intergovernmental.
The Commission should play a more active role, as it does with regard to the European judicial network in civil matters, an issue which has, in fact, been submitted for the opinion of the European Parliament.
I shall conclude, Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, by saying that I am convinced that, with the adoption of this regulation that has a limited range but which is of symbolic value and important practical application, I am convinced, I repeat, that we are taking an initial, important step towards bringing the European Union closer to the citizens, particularly those citizens who, because of the circumstances of their lives, have had the misfortune to experience the tragedy of separation or divorce, which is always a tragedy, but which should certainly not have repercussions for every child' s right to happiness.
Mr President, I do not doubt for one minute Commissioner Vitorino's commitment to this issue.
The point about the one day clearly refers to people who often travel right across the world to see a child.
There is a problem in a situation like that, if they are only allowed twenty minutes access to the child.
I think if there is a fear of abduction this can be handled by having supervised visitation.
I feel very strongly that we have to in some way ensure that the rights of these parents, of whom there are quite a lot, are respected.
Could I ask for clarification on your point about Article 17.
Are you referring in that situation to the involvement of the Secretariat of The Hague Convention in the monitoring of this legislation?
Thank you, Commissioner, for your kind remarks.
The debate is closed.
We now proceed to the vote.
(Parliament adopted the legislative resolution) President.
Mrs Banotti has worked for many years on this programme.
I am sure you must be very pleased today.
Congratulations on behalf of us all today.
EXPLANATION OF VOTE
Specific nature of sport
The next item is the Commission statement on the special position of sport.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the Commission' s position on the relationship between the legal system, Community policies and sport is laid out in the report on safeguarding existing sporting structures and maintaining the social function of sport within the Community, that the Commission presented at the Helsinki European Council in December 1999.
The Commission feels that the Treaty establishing the European Community that is currently in force enables account to be taken of the specific nature of sport in general and of its social function in particular.
The European Parliament' s statements on this matter and the case law of the Court of Justice of the European Communities, confirm the validity of the approach adopted by the Commission.
It is nevertheless true that the enormous dynamic of the Single Market and the increasing commercialisation of sporting activities have caused a number of legal conflicts in this field.
Certain sports organisations claim that these conflicts can only be resolved by the inclusion of a reference to sport in the Treaty.
The Commission does not fully share this view.
With regard to the proposals submitted by the major federations for certain sports, which are in support of a protocol that would exempt them from complying with some of the Treaty' s basic rules, specifically those relating to free movement and to competition, it must be emphasised that this kind of exemption would, if we accept this definition of it, clearly be out of step with all of the objectives we are seeking to achieve.
Furthermore, there are serious doubts as to whether such an exemption could even be effectively put into practice.
Sport these days - and this needs to be said - is closely bound up with other economic sectors, such as the audiovisual sector or the sector of the promotion and sale of sporting products, for example.
What is more, such an exemption would, at worst, not even allow Community actions for the promotion of sport.
Other equally important sports organisations, however, such as the national Olympic committees, for example, or national sports federations, have specifically insisted on the need to develop Community actions for the promotion of sport.
In any event, since the adoption of its opinion on the content of the current Intergovernmental Conference, the Commission has advocated that the Conference should focus on addressing institutional issues, which will enable it to take the process of enlargement forwards.
This is why the Commission did not include in its opinion any request for new rules on Community competence, for example in the field of sport.
In order to further highlight the specific nature of sport and even to provide guidance for the Community institutions on how to deal with sports-related issues, at the behest of the French Presidency, a draft declaration for the Nice European Council is now being prepared which would complement the conclusions of the Santa Maria da Feira European Council on this subject.
The Commission hopes that such a declaration appended to the Nice Treaty will make it possible to take the work that has been started with sports bodies further, enabling them to adapt to the new economic climate but at the same time preserving the fundamental nature of their activities.
As this Parliament stressed in the Mennea report on the report for the Helsinki Council, this would be carried out in full respect of the Community' s legislative framework.
It is in this spirit, Mr President, that the Commission will continue the intense dialogue that it has maintained over the last few months with the sports movement as a whole.
Mr President, there is no doubt that the Commission has a difficult task in ensuring that the rules of the single market and competition policy operate fairly and properly across the continent and all sectors of the economy.
I recognise their commitment and determination to do that and, of course, that sport and especially football are big business and cannot expect to be exempt from the normal rules of business.
I am far from convinced that the football transfer system should be at the top of the Commission's hit list at the present time.
It would be very prudent for the Commission to allow plenty of time for this, to allow it to go into extra time, not just so that we get a result but that we get a good result, a result that would be good for the single market and good for football.
I know that FIFA have played for time already and has waited far too long before coming up with any response to the Commission's formal statement issued back in 1998.
In many respects they have only themselves to blame for the present situation.
However, let us not forget that football is of crucial interest to millions of our citizens.
As a famous English footballer, Jackie Charlton, said, it is not just a matter of life and death; it is more important than that.
The EU must not shrug its shoulders and say "tant pis" if banning the transfer system does irreparable harm to football.
Many small clubs depend on the revenue stream that comes from transfer fees.
The transfer fee is not just a wealth distributor, it is a wealth retainer.
If transfers go, then what is to stop the upward spiral of footballers' wages?
The manufacturers of Alfa Romeos may do very well, but that money will be lost to football.
I certainly agree with the Commission that there is no need to have a mention of sport in the Treaty.
What we need is an intelligent and flexible way of interpreting the present rules.
I urge the Commission to negotiate positively with the national and international football authorities. I suggest that the Commission give much higher priority to other abuses of the single market for instance, the parallel import of designer goods.
I would like to see much more effective moves to create a single market for newspapers and journals across Europe.
The car industry too is still full of obstacles to trade.
I suggest to the Commission it puts those at the top of its list and does not allow football to become an own goal for the European Union.
Mr President, first of all I would like to send my best regards to Commissioner Viviane Reding and thank her for the initiative she has shown in the field of sport.
I am also really very glad that Commissioner Vitorino delivered this speech on the special features of sport.
Although, unfortunately, sport still does not have a legal basis in the European Union, it has many special features that must be taken into account in the work of the Union.
This is the direction it has been going in since Amsterdam.
Sport affects all the citizens of Europe, in one way or another.
It has been estimated that a hundred million people take an active interest in it in the European Union.
Sport has many important social, cultural and, besides, very significant economic dimensions.
It is a very positive sign that the Union' s sports ministers would like a statement made at the Nice Summit that would act as an extension to the Helsinki report that came out a little under a year ago.
As the purpose is to determine those ways in which matters of sport can be taken into account in community legislation, we may speak of gradual progress made in this important area.
The agenda before us is totally acceptable.
Special attention must be paid to the system of player transfers and the protection of young sportsmen and women, the role of national sports federations, club ownership, television rights, sport' s civic work and ethical principles.
As we shape the EU' s policy on sports, we have to take account of sport' s different structures.
For that reason, I hope that non-governmental sporting organisations will continue to be heard after the Olympics meeting in 1999.
At the same time we have to remember that, although many questions that require us to take a stand are connected with the professional and commercial aspects of sport, sport and exercise have a wider significance than this with regard to individuals and society.
We have to pay attention, for example, to young people' s opportunities to take up exercise as well as issues of gender equality.
The European Parliament has often expressed its concern with regard to drugs and called for more effective action to counter their use.
It is gratifying, therefore, that the Community' s extent of involvement in WADA (World Anti-Doping Agency) and in its financing is now being clarified.
This issue was discussed by Coreper on Wednesday.
It is only natural that the member of the Commission responsible for sports should represent the Union in WADA in the future.
Mr President, I would like to draw attention to the fact that the Commission already has competence in the area of sport, especially regarding the implementation of legislation on competitions.
However, the Commission has been grossly ineffective in this matter.
F1 events and, in particular, Mr Ecclestone' s work to preserve the monopoly in the field, have been looked into for years now, but no results have been forthcoming.
This is a matter of the most obvious monopoly, that of television rights, which a certain contract has ensured will continue for a hundred years.
Instead of the Commission adopting a position on this, many Commission members are mannequins for Mr Ecclestone and the motor race teams and thus contribute to establishing and upholding this monopoly.
I wish, before the Commission is granted new powers in this area, it would use those it already has.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, what is happening in sport in the European Union, in particular in professional sport and, more specifically, in football, is the consequence of having a law without a policy, of having a law that no one really had any choice about.
In other words, to put it plainly, it is the consequence of an attack on democracy, however hard we try to avoid seeing it in this light.
Most of the problems that we have experienced and that have leapt into the centre of the debate, particularly following the Bosman ruling, even when they are neither directly nor indirectly connected to the content or the nature of that case, result from the frequent and sometimes glaring contradiction between on the one hand, specific types of sporting bodies and their deeply ingrained practices, and on the other, certain rules contained in the Treaties, specifically competition rules or other principles of the internal market, particularly the free movement of workers and rules of non-discrimination on grounds of nationality.
Many of these rules are amongst the oldest in the Treaties, from the Treaty of Rome onwards, despite the amendments that they have undergone.
We all know, however, that when they were originally defined, or even when amendments were added at a later date, no one, but no one, not even those drafting them or those who took the decisions, thought for a moment that a current legal framework would hang this truly imperial weight around the neck of the sporting world.
I was talking about the economy and just the economy, in the strictest sense of the word.
Not throughout society, because in all sectors we can see windows of economic opportunity.
This is what I mean when I talk about a law without a policy.
A law which was drawn up without participation, this absurd law that nobody really wanted to be like this but which has been inexcusably foisted onto everyone.
This is why it is crucial that the Treaties recognise the specific nature of sport.
Otherwise, no problem will find a satisfactory solution.
Otherwise, we will continue to stand by helplessly in this situation in which it seems that the European Union and lucre are working hand in hand to put an end to sport, to distort the profound nature of sporting competition itself, to sabotage the social roots of clubs and the national fabric of its traditional organisation.
Otherwise, sport will continue to be regularly trampled upon with inexplicable legal violence by the corrosive and destructive effects of rules that were not designed for this purpose and about which in truth no one really had any choice or could vote on to any degree.
We are not seeking to meddle with fundamental rules or basic principles of Community law in the Treaties.
What we want is to be able to construct in a politically free and carefully considered way a balance which is appropriate to the specific needs of a sector which, although it is of primarily cultural value and enormous social relevance, also has other, economic, facets.
We need to be able to protect the sporting authenticity of sport itself and its social function from the exclusive control of the laws of the market.
I repeat: we need to protect sport, not to abandon it.
Why should we allow the basic fabric of training within the rich tapestry of sports clubs and associations to be abused?
Why are we unable or unwilling to allow safeguards for a minimum of national identity in the professional teams that represent clubs?
In sport, even in professional sport, the competition that really counts is the sporting competition itself, not just the unbridled economic competition of its agents.
Furthermore, in European sport, there is not, nor should there be a true single market.
What we have are fifteen national markets which are all different and which mirror the competitive situations in each country.
This is even more true if we look at the specific case of the United Kingdom, which, together with other, equally European countries which happen to be outside the European Union, makes up the basic pool for long-established European competitions.
Now, however, what is happening is completely the opposite.
The growing inequality in wealth lays down the law and increasingly decides who wins all the trophies.
The corruption of the authenticity of long-standing tradition has cemented the tendency and the pressures of the power of money, aided kindly by a poorly understood Community legal framework, to destroy everything that is of real cultural value and impose a single market of closed leagues and a money-obsessed spirit.
I shall end with a reminder of one of the conclusions of the resolution that we voted for in September following the Mennea report: "The European Parliament invites the Intergovernmental Conference to include an explicit reference to sport in Article 151 of the Treaty, so that the European Union will, in its actions, acknowledge the cultural, economic and social phenomenon that sport represents" .
Perhaps we are still in time.
I appeal to the forthcoming IGC not to be another wasted opportunity for sport.
In particular, I urge the French Government not to reject at Nice the words and guarantees that President Chirac gave us here in July.
That concludes this item.
UK decision to impose a levy on non-British hauliers
The next item is a Commission statement on the decision by the British Government to levy a tax on non-British hauliers.
Mr President, the Commission is aware of the package of measures in the road transport sector that the UK Government announced on 8 November in response to the recent oil price increases.
One of the plans announced is the introduction of some form of road user charge such as a vignette payable by all road hauliers, British and non-British alike, for their use of the road network in the UK.
Provided that the details of its implementation respect the relevant rules, such a measure seems to be in line with current Community law which aims at the elimination of distortion of competition through the establishment of fair mechanisms for charging infrastructure costs to hauliers and at harmonisation of levy systems within the European Union.
In fact, the EU directive governing this field, which was adopted unanimously in 1993, laid down the conditions under which Member States could, if they wanted, apply user charges or motorway tolls.
Accordingly, six Member States, Belgium, Denmark, Germany, Luxembourg, the Netherlands and Sweden introduced a common user charge system often called the euro-vignette while Austria continued to apply its own user charge system and France, Italy, Spain, Portugal and Greece maintained their already existing motorway toll system.
This means that by 1995 12 out of the 15 Member States had adjusted their levy systems with more emphasis on direct charging and less on taxes.
The Commission considers that such adjustments go in the right direction towards the establishment of fairer charging systems which also give an incentive for a more rational and efficient use of road networks.
The measures announced by the UK signal such a readjustment of its charging system.
However, the whole package of measures announced also includes other elements such as a reduction in the fuel taxes, similar to measures recently announced by other Member States.
All these measures are presently the subject of an examination by the Commission responsible under the EU Treaty for ensuring the consistency and coordination of national activities within the common transport policy.
The Commission is therefore expecting to receive shortly a reply to its request for detailed information on the measures planned by the UK government.
The Commission will then have to investigate, as it does in the case of all other Member States, whether or not such measures are likely to distort intra-Community competition.
Depending on the outcome of this analysis, the Commission will decide on the next course of action in fulfilling its role of assisting Member States in taking the measures which are right for them and while respecting the rights of others.
Mr President, I thank the Commissioner for his explanation and for the fact that he came in to talk on this subject this morning.
What he said is news to me because my understanding was that the proposal was a special tax on all foreign vehicles, which we assumed was all non-UK vehicles using the roads of the United Kingdom.
I see this as a political gesture rather than as a political or fiscal measure.
My understanding is that costs in the UK, taking into account the new proposals, without this particular charge are on a par with the rest of the European Union and on a similar level to French transport costs.
Even if the Commission says that a country may introduce that charge and put the same charge on its own vehicles, I still regard it as a distortion of the single market because presumably British hauliers will apply for their tax disc and every charge will be included in the single payment that they will make. Other users of British roads will be required to pay a special tax at the border on entry into the United Kingdom.
No matter what the Commission thinks, this is a distortion of the single market and a distortion of free trade.
This proposal is particularly hard and vexatious for Ireland.
Ireland, is obviously a very small but open market, yet most of what we buy comes from the United Kingdom.
We buy GBP 11,000 million worth of goods from Britain annually as against only GBP 7,000 million from the rest of the European Union.
That shows the extent to which Irish industry and commerce favour the British market, although with the current strength of the pound sterling, this situation will not be maintained if the value of the currency does not change.
At the moment every Irish citizen buys EUR 5,000 of goods from Britain.
I believe that this measure is certainly contrary to free trade even with the improvement that has been mentioned by the Commission.
Mr President, I thank the Commissioner for his statement and the facts that he confirmed.
It may be advantageous at this moment just to say what has actually been proposed by the UK government and also what they are proposing, bearing in mind the crisis in Britain and indeed throughout the whole of the European Union with regard to the road haulage industry.
It must be said at the outset that this is not just a specific British problem.
The proposal was put forward by the Chancellor of the Exchequer in a pre-budget statement made six months before the full budget statement made in the spring of 2001.
It contained a number of proposals, not just specifically this one on the vignette, which will effect the haulage industry.
I can assure my Irish colleagues that the vignette proposal is being made in full cognisance of the euro-vignette directive and is likely to be along similar lines to those already in place, as Commissioner Vitorino explained, in many of the present Member States of the European Union.
It is worth pointing out that at the moment lorries from the United Kingdom are faced with vignette or toll charges on roads in other EU Member States but so far such levies have not been charged within the United Kingdom.
I am sure that the United Kingdom government will be responding to the Commission's request in discussions with the Commission as well as the haulage industry to explore ways in which the vignette scheme can operate within the present euro-vignette directive.
The details of our scheme have yet to be put in place.
I understand Mr McCartin's concerns, but it seems to me that a lot of what is being said about the UK system is based not on fact but on rumour and things that are being said in the industry rather than things that have been proposed by the UK government.
I know that the UK government want to consult with hauliers and I also know that the UK government recognises the specific position of Ireland and I am sure that it will be talking to its counterparts in Dublin as well as in Belfast.
What we need to get clear today is that the UK is proposing what it is doing in full recognition that it must consult the European Union and in full recognition that there is EU legislation in place that it must abide by.
It also recognises that if it charges the euro-vignette system then it will also have to charge similar amounts to its own UK hauliers.
It recognises that whatever scheme it brings in must be non-discriminatory.
In conclusion, we are being premature in the European Parliament in holding this debate, but I welcome the fact and the statement from Commissioner Vitorino which clearly indicates that the UK government has the right to introduce a euro-vignette system provided it keeps within the rules and regulations already in place.
I believe that is what the UK government wishes.
Mr President, with great respect I have to disagree with Mr Simpson.
I do not take this debate as premature at all.
When an important proposal of this kind comes forward we, in this House, should have the chance to think about it and discuss it as early as possible, not necessarily for the last time.
Like him, however, I was very grateful to the Commissioner for the extremely clear statement of the conditions in which charges of this kind would be lawful under Community law and of the real possibility that what we are facing here is not just a dodge to get out of an awkward corner, but a proposal that will fulfil Community law.
Again, I thought that what Mr Simpson said was extremely helpful in reassuring us about the probable intentions of the UK government.
I would also like to respond to Mr McCartin's remarks.
British trade is important to Ireland but it is true the other way round as well.
For example, the economy of south west Scotland around Stranraer and Loch Ryan is heavily dependent on the traffic which comes across the north channel, the shortest crossing between the UK and Ireland.
Our people depend very heavily on that trade.
I would like to say that it would be disgraceful if we were to introduce a vignette which is supposed to support the infrastructure but do not then use it to improve the infrastructure.
The condition of the road leading from south west Scotland into the main motorway network, the A75, is disgraceful at the moment.
This might give us an opportunity at last to see a real and sustained improvement of the transport facilities which connect our two economies.
I very much hope that will be one result of this.
Mr President, taxes and tolls are obviously sensitive matters, and I can confirm this specifically on behalf of Austria where we are always having this discussion and where, of course, good traffic solutions are constantly being sought.
The Commission has already submitted an excellent Green Paper concerning fair prices on the roads, and an important principle of this Green Paper is that there should be no cross-subsidising of road hauliers and that, above all, the money collected from particular roads should be used to solve the problems on these same roads.
The Commission has also quite clearly ascertained that the greatest problem on the roads at present is accidents.
Safe and well constructed roads are an important and basic prerequisite for preventing accidents.
At present in Europe, we have approximately 50 000 deaths on the road each year.
Very many people die not least because of poor and badly signposted roads with poor visibility on which people drive with a bad mental attitude, and it costs our social systems a very great deal of money to deal with the resulting damage to people' s well-being.
Precautionary measures are therefore required in this area.
We should see to it that people are safe on the roads and, in the interests of the environment in particular, we must ensure that congestion is prevented.
Not only is a lot of time lost and high costs incurred through congestion, but it is quite a major problem for the environment in particular, and I therefore believe that, if the British government is actually investing money in solving the problems, then we all have something to gain, particularly all European citizens.
Mr President, may I first of all raise the issue of why this subject is on the agenda?
I was in this House on Monday night when the agenda was agreed by this body.
The item was not agreed for the agenda.
Later on, when one of our colleagues, Mrs Doyle, raised the issue, all of a sudden the President decided that this issue should go on to the agenda.
That is not a democratic and fair way of drawing up this House's agenda.
This House draws up the agenda, not the President at the whim of one Member.
I also notice that Mrs Doyle is not here today to take part in this.
That said, I will go on to talk about the subject in question.
It is time we had a debate on the subject.
I listened to Mr McCartin earlier and it is evident he has got the wrong end of the stick.
This is not discriminating against every other driver or road haulier in Europe to the benefit of British drivers.
This applies to all road hauliers, whether they come from the UK or any other country.
That should be made quite clear.
Also, the details are yet to be fully worked out but I was quite heartened to hear the statement from the Commissioner about how it is going to be proposed and developed.
I am sure the British government will be in discussion with the Commission in applying this vignette.
I should also like to pick up on a point raised by Mr MacCormick.
He talked about the trade between Ireland and Scotland, the south west of Scotland, coming over to Stranraer and Loch Ryan.
He said that he hoped the money raised by this vignette would go towards improving the infrastructure around the south west of Scotland.
I know the south west of Scotland is part of my area and yes, the infrastructure there is not the best, it can be improved.
But can I point out to Mr MacCormick that this vignette is for the whole of the UK.
It is to improve the road structure throughout the whole of the UK.
We cannot take one small area of the UK and say that is where it is going.
It is for the whole of the UK.
That is a point we should be making quite clearly.
On the first point you made, Mr Miller, this proposal was put to the House by the President and it was the House which agreed to the change to today's agenda.
Mr President, like a number of Members in the chamber this morning I come from rip-off Britain.
We are more or less the only oil producers in the European Union and yet we face the highest petrol prices, the highest diesel prices of any country in Europe - GBP 1.20 a litre for diesel is paid in the United Kingdom.
Vehicle excise duties are eight times the French level in the UK, so one should not be too surprised that in Britain there is a great deal of concern.
As a British driver, when I go on French motorways I must pay French tolls.
I might say that by the time I have arrived at Calais, having driven from Strasbourg, I feel I own the French motorway system, so expensive are those tolls.
I drove in Austria in the summer and paid the Austrian vignette which seemed to me to be perfectly fair and reasonable and a much more agreeable price than one pays on French motorways.
My objection to this proposal is not that it is unfair.
At long last the British government has come up with a reasonable solution.
We in my party proposed it two years ago.
The present British government has allowed the situation to get out of hand and it is rather late in the day for them to come up with this proposal which will probably take another two years to come into effect.
If they do bring it into effect, we want to see them really pass the benefits on to the British road-users.
Mr President, now we have vignettes dotted all over Europe and tolls in some other countries, would you agree with me that the euro-vignette system is not a very good single market system.
The local haulier in Denmark or in the UK will get his full money's worth 365 days a year, but the foreign haulier from another Member State entering that country - maybe for one or two days or ten days or even 100 days - will not.
He is paying over the odds for his vignette unless there is some special dispensation on a per diem basis.
Would it not be better now that we have arrived at this stage to think of maybe having a mutual recognition system, so that a vignette in one country is recognised in other countries, giving a real euro-vignette system works?
The Commission should consider coming forward with proposals in order to provide for a common system throughout Europe.
I would like to turn now to my friend Mr McCartin.
I agree that Irish trucks have a special case.
They are compelled by geography to pass through the UK just as British trucks are compelled to pass through the Netherlands, Belgium and France to get around the European Union.
The best thing the UK could do to help the Irish and to help the Scottish is to improve the very inferior British motorway system on which we depend to get to our markets.
Yes, the Stranraer-Carlisle road is an absolute disgrace.
But it is also difficult getting round Birmingham, getting around London, getting to the Channel Tunnel and to the channel ports.
The best thing the British could do with this extra money is to improve our system in the hope of improving UK-Irish friendship and relations.
That concludes this item.
Adjournment of the session
I declare adjourned the session of the European Parliament.
(The sitting was closed at 11.05 a.m.)
Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Friday, 17 November 2000.
Statement by the President
Ladies and gentlemen, like all of you, I am sure, I would have liked to have been able to open this part-session without having to announce further news of the latest victims of ETA terrorism.
Unfortunately, our democracies have been sent a new message of violence in the form of the particularly heinous murder of Ernest Lluch.
On 22 November, the very day of the 25th anniversary of the coronation of King Juan Carlos, which paved the way to democracy in Spain, one of the key figures in this democracy has, in turn, paid with his life for his belief in freedom, tolerance and respect for the rights of others.
He was Health Minister for your country in your government, Mr Barón Crespo.
In the 1960s, you fought together, Mr Colom i Naval, for democracy in Spain.
Known as a key player in the Spanish transition to democracy and for his contribution to Catalonia' s autonomous status, loved for his warmth, respected for his qualities as a politician and a great academic, Ernest Lluch was targeted by his murderers purely because of his dedication to the rule of law.
I should like to express my deepest sympathy to his family and friends and to all those in Spain who believe in the strength of democracy.
Approximately a million Spanish citizens, of all political persuasions, have stood up to protest against this despicable murder.
The European Parliament has a duty to let them know that we stand with them, and so I propose, once again, that we observe a minute' s silence to express our solidarity and deep feeling.
(The House rose and observed a minute' s silence)
Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting
The Minutes of the sitting of Friday, 17 November have been distributed.
Are there any comments?
There are none.
(The Minutes were approved)
We shall deal with procedural motions after the debate on the Nice Summit, as you have requested.
You are aware that we have a very full agenda and I have therefore taken this decision by virtue of the powers accorded me under the Rules of Procedure in order to ensure the smooth running of parliamentary business.
So please keep them safe until then.
Madam President, I must protest against this decision, on the grounds that procedural motions can be made for very important, very serious reasons.
This is not an appropriate way of proceeding. Last time you put this item off until after the agenda was established.
That was bad enough. Now, you might as well put it off until after the explanations of votes.
You are perfectly entitled to do so pursuant to Rule 18, but it must not be thought that procedural motions have nothing to do with the specific, topical issues which the Members wish to raise at the beginning of a sitting, and it is important that Parliament should hear them.
Let me register my protest against this decision.
This has been noted, Mr Dell' Alba.
Agenda
Madam President, I totally support this proposal since I was one of those who asked for this item to be entered.
On many occasions Parliament has expressed itself in favour of a firm stand on the Kyoto commitments.
I therefore feel that the European delegation at the Conference in The Hague was right to adopt this hard line.
Now, however, we must, as a matter of urgency, work on a new draft declaration.
I therefore think that we must proceed in the way you have suggested, until there is a resolution followed by a vote at our December part-session in Strasbourg.
(Parliament gave its assent to the proposal)
Welcome
The Hague Conference on Climate Change
The next item is the Commission statement on the Conference on Climate Change in The Hague.
I shall immediately give the floor to Mrs Wallström to speak on behalf of the Commission.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, thank you for inviting me to share with you my impressions of the sixth conference of the parties, the so-called COP6, to the United Nations framework convention on climate change, that took place the past two weeks in The Hague.
After intensive negotiations, both at technical and ministerial level, on the basis of draft decisions with approximately 500 square brackets, it was not possible to reach a comprehensive agreement on key political issues.
The European Union negotiating position concentrated on safeguarding the environmental integrity of the Kyoto protocol in the areas of land-use change and forestry, the "sinks" issue, the relation between the Kyoto mechanism and domestic action, known as "supplementarity" , and compliance.
This meant that in the negotiations with other parties, trade-offs between these issues had to be explored.
With good technical progress on the rules for the Kyoto mechanisms and the development of a compliance system, final negotiations focused mainly on trade-offs between "supplementarity" and "sinks" .
However, there was not enough time to fully evaluate last minute compromise proposals on the use of "sinks" in terms of their impact on the different countries inside and outside the European Union.
Nevertheless, there was sufficient evidence that the environmental integrity would be seriously compromised.
Therefore, the European Union decided not to accept these proposals.
In order not to let the mandate of the Buenos Aires plan of action, that ran until the so-called COP6 conference, expire without any concrete result or follow-up, parties have decided to suspend COP6 and resume the conference in May 2001.
COP6 was not all negative - far from it.
We made some good progress.
For example, a set of proposals responding to developing countries' needs and concerns was drawn up, including new funding and new institutions, but also a more focused approach on climate change within the global environment facility - the so-called GEF.
Also progress was made at the technical level on other issues, such as policies and measures to reduce emissions, capacity building, technology transfer, emissions trading, joint implementation and compliance.
All efforts should be made to finalise these decisions at the resumed session in May.
Another positive outcome of COP6 is that it helped to obtain a better understanding of other parties' positions.
This knowledge is extremely useful and should be built on further in the coming months.
Mr Pronk was a very dedicated president of COP6.
The proposal he made at the end of the second week outlines a package and constitutes one of the bases for further discussion and negotiation in the coming months.
However, insufficient time was left to finalise the negotiations on the basis of his document; too much precious negotiating time was lost on ministerial statements and the repetition of well-known positions.
Consequently, there was not enough time to analyse all the impacts of the different proposals relating to sinks that were made in the final hours.
This is an issue that remains the subject of significant uncertainty.
We all knew that, in order to get an agreement with the United States and its allies of the "umbrella group" , the European Union would have to make concessions.
In the end, however, the concessions obtained from other parties on "supplementarity" , compliance and the Kyoto mechanisms were insufficient to compensate for the weakening of emission-reduction targets, that would have been the result if the proposal on "sinks" had been accepted.
Where do we go from here?
As a priority, evaluation and preparation of further discussions should take place within the European Union.
With a view to preparing this next session, the EU should not reopen discussions on all issues, but focus on key priorities, notably "sinks" mechanisms, "supplementarity" and a strong compliance regime.
A smooth transition from the French to the Swedish Presidency has to be ensured and close contact should also be kept with Mr Pronk.
The EU must review its positions on the key issues and, where appropriate, make new proposals.
The Commission is fully committed to developing a strong common EU line together with the incoming presidency.
In addition to further coordination within the European Union, contacts with other parties should be intensified.
An absolute pre-condition for an agreement on "sinks" at the next session is to have one common set of data, instead of every party doing its own calculation.
The EU will deepen its relations with all major groups and will also contact the new US administration as soon as possible.
Finally, as the rules and modalities for the functioning of the Kyoto protocol have not been adopted, ratification of the protocol will have to be postponed until after the next session and the meeting of COP6.
However, the internal preparation for ratification through the European climate change programme and the development of a European Union emissions trading scheme will continue.
Thank you for your attention and I am willing to answer any questions you might have.
Madam President, I am sorry that the Commissioner obviously had a very frustrating time at The Hague, but I congratulate her on remaining optimistic.
The European Parliament delegation to the talks was equally disappointed at the outcome, although we were not surprised.
Certainly we could have foreseen, as she could, the problem that arose over "sinks" .
Those who read the French and British press will realise that there is quite a lot of attention on what seems to have been the breakdown in the relationship between Mrs Voynet, the French minister, and Mr Prescott, the British minister.
They were, in a sense, an accident waiting to happen - like the Titanic and the iceberg.
Mr Prescott is now holed below the water line and we do not know how long he will remain afloat.
One of the things we feel, at least I feel in a personal capacity, is the trouble is that a Green minister has absolutely no room to negotiate on Green issues.
Madam Voynet was bound not to give way to the American point of view. You would not expect any less of her, would you?
My question to the Commissioner is: Does she feel that there is any flexibility likely to arise in the European Union position on "sinks" ; secondly, when does she forecast that the talks are likely to resume; and thirdly, was Mr Prescott' s statement to the House of Commons actually true?
He said in the House of Commons that the agreement which he had laboriously brokered with all the skills of a Sherman tank would have prevented developed countries from gaining credits from the clean development mechanism for planting forests in developing countries, which sounds rather good.
This was felt by many countries, particularly the green groups, to be a huge loophole.
The agreement would have placed a ceiling on the use of forest sinks by the United States, Japan and Canada, a ceiling which Europe had been asking for, and strengthen the scientific requirements applied to the domestic sinks.
Given the - surprise - glowing report by Mr Prescott on the deal which he had himself brokered, why was it that not only Madam Voynet but, I believe, and this is my last question to the Commissioner, most of the other environment ministers in Europe all rejected that?
It seems from Mr Prescott' s report to his own Parliament that he was making them an offer they could not refuse?
In conclusion I regret that this has happened, but I hope that we will in the end share Mrs Wallström' s optimism and get the kind of agreement on climate change which we need.
Madam President, first of all, I should like to say to the Commission that it has done its job well.
It is my wish that the European Union will continue to speak with one voice at the forthcoming international gatherings, and I consider it utterly futile to spend our time now apportioning blame to individual ministers.
That will get us nowhere.
We know that the failure of this conference is not the end of what has been a very lengthy and highly complex process; the process will continue.
However, we must ask ourselves where improvements can be made.
The first point, which I also frame as a question to the Commission, is whether this method we have chosen here, with conferences at which representatives of 180 nations have to agree on a joint document, does not ask too much of us, especially when time is pressing towards the end and the differences between the main parties have not yet been settled.
Is it not time that this issue was dealt with by the U.S. and European Heads of State and Government at the G7 summits?
Secondly, this does not mean that I aim to give us such an easy time.
When we point the finger at the Americans, we must not forget that a number of fingers are pointed back at us. It is not as if we Europeans had all done our homework.
CO2 emissions are on the increase here too; we know that, and we have discussed it often enough.
The question is whether we actually need a global convention before we can start to reduce our own emissions.
May I remind the Commission of its communication on emissions trading and on the conference in The Hague, in which it spoke of being able, in certain circumstances, to present a draft directive in which the quotas agreed by the environment ministers in 1998 would be prescribed and in which sanctions would be laid down for quota violations.
My question is this: are you willing to do that, to present such an instrument, even though we have not completed the Kyoto process?
Is there actually anything to stop us introducing emissions trading in the European Union in the year 2005, now that a number of countries have already made a start on emissions trading within their national borders?
My final comment is that I find it right and proper that you have remained firm on the issue of "sinks" , primarily because it is extremely difficult to measure "sinks" accurately.
We were supposed to bring home measurable results, by which I mean physically measurable results, but that aim has not been compatible with the Americans' position.
Madam President, these negotiations were always going to be hard but Commission officials believed that a deal would be done at the end of the day because political leaders across the world simply had too much to lose by returning home empty-handed.
It is a matter of huge disappointment that agreement was not reached and I very much regret that the end of the convention was marred by a dispute between Britain' s Deputy Prime Minister and the French Presidency over the compromise proposals he put forward.
The fact that after Mr Prescott' s rather noisy departure, the Americans tabled new proposals, which came closer to the EU position, demonstrates that the French Presidency was right to hold firm.
We were getting closer, but sadly time ran out.
The fear is that the momentum has been lost and the American negotiators will change and we start afresh in May.
The disagreement within Europe is all the more regrettable because my overriding impression of the convention was of a European Union negotiating as a closely-knit team, from a position which crossed party lines and united Member States behind shared principles, a shared outlook and a shared sense of anger at the refusal of the Americans to face up to their responsibilities as the world' s largest emitters of greenhouse gases.
From all we have heard, we must assume that the US Senate will not ratify the Kyoto protocol, however hard we compromise.
Therefore, we must give greater priority to bringing in and gaining the support of nations elsewhere, to getting emissions trading up and running, and to taking real action to reduce global warming gases in this Union.
Let us hope we get agreement in May; in the meantime let Europe take the lead.
The USA remains of great importance.
Money talks in American politics more than it does within our Union.
US industry and the oil companies are telling their politicians that they must reject the Kyoto protocol, whatever the American public say.
My question to the Commissioner is this: How can we persuade American industry that it is in their commercial interests to support the protocol, so that they pull purse strings and pull the American politicians into line?
How do we drag them kicking and screaming into the 21st century with all its problems?
Madam President, the conference on the world climate may have broken down but substantial progress was made nonetheless.
Nuclear energy has no chance of making a comeback.
The developing countries said: if you northern countries are going to stop using nuclear energy then we do not want it either, not even if it is subsidised.
Progress was also made in the field of enforcement.
The developing countries are to receive USD 1 billion after 2005.
If the clean development mechanism starts working then they will receive between USD 5 billion and USD 25 billion in addition, annually.
President Pronk acquitted himself well as far as the developing countries are concerned but his compromise was lacking in terms of environmental issues.
The forests proved to be the major stumbling block this time round.
Three years ago, in Kyoto, the United States wanted to use Russia as a means of getting round having to take any measures in their own country.
Now the Clinton administration wanted the cheapest measures, i.e. to allow forests to grow.
Of course forests eat up CO2 but once they are fully grown this no longer happens.
Besides, forests burn down, which is happening increasingly often.
The solution must be found in energy efficiency and renewable sources of energy.
The negotiators working on behalf of the European Union certainly wanted to leave quite a lot of leeway for forests, but no more than 20% of all measures to be adopted.
Prescott' s deal, whereby the United States would be allowed to emit 1/3 via forests, 1/3 via hot air and 1/3 via CDM, was a poor and unacceptable deal.
Fortunately, 14 of the 15 Ministers for the Environment were of the same mind on this issue.
But we must press on, and equality must be incorporated in Bonn, in May 2001.
Every citizen of the world has an equal right to CO2-emission, i.e. the Americans do not have the right to emit 200 times as much as the Africans.
Only if equality is incorporated will the developing countries start to participate in the fight against climate change after 2012.
In order to stabilise the climate on the basis of equality, the United States will have to cut back on their emissions by 90% and the European Union will have to cut back by 80%.
China will then have to stabilise its emissions, and then India will be allowed to double its emissions.
There needs to be a breakthrough in May next year, without the United States if need be.
The Kyoto Protocol can, and must, be ratified, even without the United States.
I hope we will come to see the wisdom of this.
Madam President, industry and transport cause the earth' s atmosphere to warm up artificially.
If this global warming continues, then part of the territory of the EU Member States will become sea or desert.
We will need to drastically alter our economy if we are to keep the world and Europe habitable on a permanent basis.
Parliament has recently pronounced itself in favour of a number of steps that will take us in the right direction.
The European position during the climate conference, which ended - and evidently broke down - in The Hague last Saturday, was characterised by two sharply conflicting views.
One view is that we should stick closely to the 1997 agreements in order to reduce emissions by a generous 5%, as compared with 1990.
It is felt that we should now honour the Kyoto commitments already entered into, and that a willingness to compromise with America represents a betrayal of Europe' s commitment.
The other view is that the Kyoto obligations have never been feasible because there is too much opposition from America, Japan, and Australia, and the only way to reach an international agreement now, would be to reduce their commitments to take action.
Creative accountancy would enable us to give the impression that they have already fulfilled a substantial number of their obligations.
The European Union made an error of judgement where the second view is concerned, because the green Environment Ministers of France and Germany were not prepared to forget Kyoto.
We will still need to find a compromise of this kind at the follow-up conference due to take place in May 2001, in Bonn.
My group favours the first view.
It is important for Europe to stick with a position taken up previously, even though it means that the United States will not be in a position to subscribe to an agreement of this kind for the period of the Bush administration.
Taking the long-term view, it is important that we convince the American public of the dangers of the do-nothing option, rather than agreeing a compromise with our opponents.
The United States produce the largest amount of pollution per capita.
As yet, American public opinion has not given a great deal of credence to the notion that the deserts will expand and there will be an increase in hurricanes.
They have a high standard of living over there and the price of petroleum products is low.
The people feel that any actual changes will be to the detriment of industry and consumers.
It is therefore unlikely that an international agreement would now be able to gain approval from the US Congress.
Finally, the Third World is only in the very early stages of industrialisation.
Poverty has forced these countries to sell their CO2 emission rights to rich countries, which want to use them to reduce their own obligations.
At the end of the day, these countries will not give up their rights to progress.
The emission of greenhouse gases will increase dramatically as a result.
That is why we need to keep these realities in mind in the follow-up to the climate conference.
A compromise cannot mean forgetting what was agreed in Kyoto.
Madam President, I am extremely disappointed, like the vast majority of the House and the previous speakers, that the UN world climate change summit was not a success in The Hague.
It is regrettable that the participants did not reach an agreement on how best to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in the future.
The Kyoto accord of three years ago set out a timetable for the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions.
This Kyoto protocol must not be watered down under any circumstances.
In fact, the opposite is the case. The industrialised world in particular may have to set even stricter limits for the reduction of greenhouse gases in the future, if we are to ensure that the impact of global warming is to be arrested and ultimately controlled.
The challenge facing us in the issue of climate change is clearly one of the greatest challenges in the 21st century, if we are all to have a planet to live on in the future.
If we do not address this issue in a structured and streamlined manner, then global warming will increase, with serious side-effects for land, marine and aerial environments, not to mention human life.
It has already been said that the next meeting to discuss the issue of the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions will take place in Bonn, which will coincide with a publication by the United Nations intergovernmental panel on climate change.
This panel is made up of some 3,000 scientists from all around the world who will give their assessment as to what measures are needed to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
The Environment Committee of this Parliament has been at the forefront in addressing the issue of climate change in the past.
We are walking closely with the Commissioner for the environment, Mrs Wallström, on a number of EU regulations and directives, which will help control greenhouse gases in the European Union.
The European Union must take a lead in this matter.
The Environment Committee and Parliament have set a good example in the past as to how we should collectively address the issue of greenhouse gas reductions in the future.
We must continue with vigour and determination in the future on this issue.
Future generations will pay a price for our inactivity in this very important subject.
I compliment Commissioner Wallström on her efforts in The Hague and wish her more success.
Madam President, we too were very disappointed that the Conference on Climate Change in The Hague broke down.
Any discussion as to where the blame lies leads all too easily to the United States being singled out for criticism.
As I see it, the fact that no agreement was reached was ultimately down to the intransigence of the European Union.
The discussion in The Hague focused mainly on the question as to what exactly can be taken into account as regards the reductions agreed in Kyoto.
In October we were able, during the discussion of the proposal concerning trade in emissions, to opt for efficient and effective ways of reducing emissions.
Unfortunately, Parliament failed to make a clear choice at the time.
As far as the 50% is concerned, I feel I must point out that this objective should never be the be all and end all.
If we could reach an agreement with the United States which allows them to work towards a lower realisation percentage in their own country, this would always be preferable to having no agreement at all.
The same applies to the partial inclusion of the CO2 sinks, such as the additional planting of forests.
Although I do not have a good word to say about the US stance, one thing I do know is that the United States were prepared to achieve an acceptable compromise at the end of the conference.
The intransigence of the European Union, led by the French Minister for the Environment, Mrs Voynet, stood in the way of a potential agreement.
Some people value the European Union' s stance because they stuck to their guns.
In reality, the chances of reaching agreement in the future are slimmer, which means that an effective strategy for tackling the climate problem is an even more remote prospect.
Madam President, I share the honourable Members' intense disappointment at the outcome of the Conference in The Hague, which is effectively an outright failure.
I should not, however, like to enter into personal squabbles, and I think we should refrain from that sort of completely negative discussion.
I should like to congratulate the Commission, and Mrs Wallström, on keeping to the commitments it had always made towards reducing emissions, including among others greenhouse gas emissions.
Without doubt, it was better to have no agreement at all than a poor one and it is true that, in this instance, the American proposal was a third-rate proposal, and one which was completely unacceptable to Europe.
In any case, an agreement can only be accepted and acceptable if there is a balance between North and South, between developing countries and industrialised countries.
I am already extremely concerned about resorting to the right to pollute. In my opinion, this can only hinder the economic development of countries that are already extremely underdeveloped.
The United States' position, resorting to the idea of forests being carbon sinks, is unacceptable, for, then, no one would make any effort.
We must reject these American diktats.
This situation highlights the limitation of a Europe which, with its rotation of presidencies, does not have a strong political image to present to the United States and does not speak with a single voice.
It also clearly highlights, once again, the desperate need to reform the European institutions and the way they operate.
When will we have a President of the European Union that is strong and capable alone of representing Europe with regard to our partners?
Let us conclude, however, on a hopeful note.
The Conference in The Hague is to be resumed, as you have informed us, Commissioner, next spring in Bonn.
You may count on our support, Commissioner, so we might be able to stand up to the United States and take up the gauntlet.
Madam President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, let us not beat about the bush, the climate conference in The Hague was a flop, which is disappointing because it is becoming increasingly apparent that climate change is happening much faster than anticipated.
Therefore the world needs a powerful political signal.
Kyoto must not remain an empty promise.
The failure of the climate conference sends out the wrong signal to the public.
Many people will start thinking that the climate problems are not all that bad if those involved in the international politics of it are content not to do anything.
This would also undermine the level of support for sustainable energy and energy efficiency.
Climate change has a huge impact on the developing countries.
Countries such as India, Bangladesh, Indonesia and Thailand have to contend with floods that affect millions of people.
We set great store by the 'polluter pays' principle, but hitherto, it has been the third world countries themselves that have been saddled with the bill and adapting to climate change.
This is unacceptable to my mind.
Commissioner, the statements on the failure of the climate conference were lacking in credibility.
The negotiators declared afterwards that an agreement had been within reach.
They said there was no shortage of political will, the parties moved closer to each other' s positions, and demonstrated increased understanding of each other' s cultures.
Unfortunately though, they ran out of time.
I do not find that very credible.
Behind all the fine words lurks political impotence.
The European Union is going to have to carefully assess its own role.
It is not enough to blame the United States or to complain about the lack of flexibility shown by others.
We have repeatedly said ourselves that no agreement is better than a bad agreement, but that does not mean that we should make our own political wish list the yardstick of a sound agreement.
The climate conference will resume in the spring.
So now we must look to the future.
Commissioner, I would like to thank you for the cooperation we have enjoyed.
Finally, I would like to put three questions to you. Firstly, how would you yourself assess the European Union' s stance, and what practical lessons would you draw from the failure of the conference?
Secondly, how do you intend to proceed in the coming months?
Will you enter into debate with the United States over the forest problem and the scientific issues and lack of clarity that are still at large in this respect?
Thirdly, which aspects do you think the EU should make more concessions on?
Personally, I feel we could probably moderate our demands somewhat on the point of supplementarity.
Your opinion on this would be much appreciated, and I thank you for your attention.
Madam President, thank you, Commissioner Wallström, for your intervention.
I think the EU successfully kept its act together, apart perhaps from in the last critical hours.
Clearly, however, there are many losers following a conference of this kind.
I think that we, as politicians, have lost out because we have sent a very bad signal to a great many committed people by failing to reach an agreement.
Secondly, I think that the section of commerce and industry which looks seriously at this problem and which would like to have some ground rules has also lost out.
Therefore, it is, of course, incredibly important for there to be another conference soon.
I think the EU was right not to give way on carbon sinks.
This is not just because of the difficulties of verification and measurement but also because more and more researchers maintain - whether rightly or wrongly, I do not know - that today' s carbon sinks may well be tomorrow' s carbon sources.
Or, to put it another way: forests stop being carbon sinks and become carbon sources.
If that is the case, then it would obviously be extremely risky to add this to the equation at the present stage, when it is still so difficult to come up with definitions.
I should prefer to say, Commissioner, that, in the ongoing dialogue with the Americans, it would be better to be more generous when it comes to emissions trading in general than to introduce something which is extremely difficult to substantiate on the basis purely of research.
I was a part of the parliamentary delegation.
We had a meeting with a number of American Members of Congress.
I was quite alarmed at the arrogance and ignorance shown by the Americans.
I got the feeling that they do not want to ratify the Kyoto protocol under any circumstances.
One conclusion I came to is that we need more in the way of transatlantic dialogue on these issues - not only dialogue between governments and the Commission but also, and especially, between Members of Congress.
That is perhaps something which we in the European Parliament can help bring about.
Finally, a question: even if a conference in May were not to succeed, is the Commissioner prepared to go further, to be in the vanguard, take the lead and recommend ratification by the EU?
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, as Chairman of the European Parliament delegation to COP­VI, I wish to begin by expressing my pleasure at the excellent relationship that has developed between the Commission and Parliament over this last week.
If there is one area in which there has been no lack of unity, it is in this relationship.
I am bound to regret the fact, however, that the will of some ministers of the 15 Member States has been directed more towards racing to attend press conferences than creating a genuine spirit of unity that will guarantee a global policy on climate change.
Madam President, we knew that this COP­VI would be of particularly great importance: it represented abandoning the stage of discussion in which we had been stuck since 1992 and moving on towards action.
Since we were not able to reach an agreement, we failed in our objective of moving on towards action.
To put it frankly, if we have to make an assessment of what took place, we could say that out of the three parties participating in the Conference, only one tried to reach an agreement and tried to achieve a global policy on climate change, and that was the European Union.
The United States - but let us also state quite clearly that it was the entire "umbrella group" - concocted a whole series of excuses for not reaching any type of agreement at COP­VI, in The Hague.
By May, by Bonn, the European Union must take action on two fronts: firstly through diplomacy, since the scenario that the United States will ratify the agreement is the least likely, and so diplomatic action must be developed with the other members of the umbrella group.
Secondly, we must act within the Union in order to guarantee our credibility.
Only if we have this credibility will the European Union be able to lead the debate and the action at COP­VI "B" in Bonn.
Madam President, thank you for your support and a special thanks to the European Parliamentary delegation who were there in The Hague.
I actually remember meeting Mrs Corbey, who was there the whole time, going to a session at 5.30 one morning.
You were all very supportive during the session and I thank you for that.
We sometimes discuss the climate change issue as if its effects will only be felt in the long term by our children and grandchildren.
However, climate change has already happened, it is already there.
The ice caps are measurably melting.
Small island states in the Pacific are slowly disappearing because of the rise in sea level.
We see the effects in our everyday lives.
Even though the experts are very careful not to say that any particular storm or extreme weather condition is due to climate change, we will see more extreme weather as climate change continues.
So it is also for us.
Of course it is an issue for coming generations, but it is a fact, especially for people living in poor countries, as has also been said.
What can we do now?
Now is not the time to apportion blame or to point fingers.
Now is the time to decide that we cannot fail once more.
Failing to achieve an agreement at the next COP6 meeting is not an option.
I am quite optimistic because I felt we came so close and that all the ministers there understand that a five per cent reduction as in the Kyoto Protocol is only a small part of the commitment we will have to make for the future.
This is only the start.
Maybe we should not be too worried about taking a little more time, a few months more, to decide on the rules and the framework, the legal framework, that must be put in place in order to operate the huge economic market that will be created.
Of course we need some clear operational rules to regulate an emissions trading market worth twelve billion dollars.
We had too much left on the table for these negotiations and we will have to try to sort that out.
We will have to make our own assessment of what happened, and prepare the documents to make contacts with different parties, and of course with the "umbrella group" .
It is very much up to the American administration to tell us with whom we should speak.
We will also have to continue our contacts with developing countries.
That is how we can take this issue forward constructively.
Now let me just answer the questions on whether we were flexible.
Sometimes these negotiations are extremely chaotic, and I think that you can always go home and look back saying that we made this mistake or that mistake.
However, for the environment ministers present at The Hague, and you know we have also set the tone here, the main objectives were to defend the credibility and integrity of the Kyoto Protocol.
So we would not allow any creative accounting on, for example, certain issues.
The Americans presented us with a proposal that would have reduced their commitment by between 70 and 90 per cent.
We simply could not accept that.
Should we lower our ambitions when we know we need to do more?
At the same time, we made concessions.
We opened up discussions on what we had earlier said were big loopholes, or potentially of big loopholes.
We were very constructive and we negotiated until the last minute of these talks in The Hague.
We will continue to be willing to make concessions, but I think we were flexible while at the same time defending our main objectives, and we should continue to do that.
We now know what kind of questions we will have on the table for this last part.
I am hopeful, I really think that the awareness is there.
All ministers know that they cannot escape this huge task of combating climate change; this was also clear from the meeting in The Hague.
We will do everything to be able to turn this into an agreement and actually be able to sign it.
Of course the follow up of the next COP6 or the continuation of COP6 will be to ratify an agreement inside the Union.
We can start emissions trading earlier.
We can take a lot of measures, which the Commission will propose.
As soon as we get the chance, as soon as the legal framework is in place, we will move.
I again thank you for this debate.
I have taken note of everything that has been said, we will of course follow up and be willing to come back whenever Parliament asks us to.
Many thanks both to the Commissioner and to the Members of the House.
The debate is closed.
Preparation of Nice European Council and trade policy
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on the preparation of the Nice European Council from 7 to 9 December 2000, including trade policy.
We are pleased to welcome Mr Hubert Védrine.
Mr President-in-Office of the Council, you have the floor.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, I am here to tell the House about the Presidency' s preparations for the Nice European Council.
There are some very important items on the agenda but even so they far from reflect all the work that has been done and all the results that have already been obtained during the last six months.
The European Council will, naturally, only be asked to deal with issues which cannot be dealt with at any other level, primarily institutional reform, and to provide the general political guidelines and impetus.
The President of the Republic himself is coming here on 12 December to present a report on the Presidency.
The major issue facing the members of the European Council at Nice will clearly be the reform of the institutions and the finalisation of what we all hope will become the Treaty of Nice.
Before the European Council, Pierre Moscovici and I will still be holding a Ministerial Conclave, next Sunday, to which I have invited Mr Brok and Mr Tsatsos, as well as a session of the IGC, on Monday at the General Affairs Council.
We will then get a more precise picture of how the negotiations are progressing in their final phase, on the eve of Nice.
I hope we will have a full exchange of views with the President of Parliament at that time.
So today I will just be bringing you up to date on the main issues under discussion.
Real progress on qualified majority and enhanced cooperation was made at the informal European Council of Biarritz.
There was also a beneficial clarification of the issues around the Commission and the weighting of votes, allowing each Member State to get a better idea of the objectives and difficulties of the others.
Pierre Moscovici reported to you on that on 24 October.
We have been building on that foundation over the last few weeks taking all the points of view into account with a view to arriving at a compromise, but keeping our sights set on an ambitious agreement at Nice.
We sometimes hear the Presidency accused of lacking ambition; there are no grounds for saying that today.
That is clearly demonstrated by the texts submitted to the IGC, despite the extreme difficulty of the subject matter, and I really do sense a genuine determination to succeed on the part of the Fifteen.
Good progress has been made on qualified majority voting, which could be extended to another thirty areas, if some Member States make the effort to confirm this.
Some countries still have major problems regarding the coordination of social security systems, tax, asylum, visa and immigration matters and trade negotiations on services - a very important issue.
But we will approach Nice with a positive attitude, determined to make progress as many aspects of these sensitive issues as possible.
The role of the European Parliament is naturally one of the important elements in the debate.
In many areas where qualified majority voting would be introduced the move to codecision already has majority support, and that goes a long way towards meeting your expectations.
The Fifteen are now close to agreement on making enhanced cooperation more flexible.
You discussed this on 24 October, and on several points the Intergovernmental Conference is reaching solutions close to those advocated by Parliament.
The minimum number of participating Member States should be set at eight while the clause allowing appeal to the European Council, which currently constitutes a real right of veto, would be replaced by a power of retrieval.
Parliament has made proposals on its role in triggering enhanced cooperation in the Community sphere.
These will be discussed.
As regards the CFSP, several Member States have emphasised its specific nature which, in their view, warrants special mechanisms, and they have been stressing that particularly in the last few days.
We will be discussing this at next Sunday' s conclave.
On the Commission, two options were on the table at Biarritz: capping the number of Commissioners, or a Commission made up of one representative from each Member State.
But a third solution has emerged from the negotiations which might allow everyone' s concerns to be taken into account.
This would involve setting a ceiling on the Commission, to come into play once enlargement reaches a certain numerical level.
That ceiling would be linked to a system of equal rotation.
This at least provides a serious avenue to be explored in Nice, one that still remains to be defined and clarified but on which a clear majority of the delegations is ready to work.
Progress has also been made on increasing the powers of the President of the Commission and a possible increase in the number of Vice-Presidents.
Finally on the weighting of votes in the Council, there are also two main options on the table since the Biarritz declaration: either a double majority or a simple reweighting.
There is perceptible movement - I say that with caution because several Member States may not yet have determined their final position - but support has begun to emerge for a simple reweighting whose exact scope and conditions remain to be defined, of course.
Several scenarios have been considered and studies carried out.
It will be up to the European Council to decide.
Let me add that we have not yet reached agreement on the distribution of seats in the European Parliament.
Your own proposal has obviously been submitted by the Presidency and is one of the two options on the table.
There too, a solution will have to be found at Nice.
To end this brief report on the negotiations, we have also made good progress on strengthening Article 7 of the Treaty which should in future provide for an early warning system in the event of a threatened violation of the European Union' s fundamental principles.
On the other hand, the idea of a reference to the Charter of Fundamental Rights in Article 6, championed by the European Parliament in its recommendation of 14 November, and placed on the table at the IGC by the French Presidency, was vigorously rejected by several Member States.
Some even asserted that such a reference would jeopardise the Charter' s proclamation.
It may be regrettable, but I have to recognise the position.
Finally, a word on the Court of Justice.
The work is almost complete.
All the delegations agree on giving the European Parliament the possibility of seeking the Court' s opinion on a draft international agreement.
On the other hand, even though the Presidency has also proposed extending to Parliament the right of appeal to the Court under Article 230, several delegations are against that at this stage.
I want to be as objective as possible about the situation before this very important Council.
In Nice, as you know, our aim is to achieve a good agreement, which naturally means compromise, but compromise that is constructive, not regressive.
At Nice, the Heads of State and Government and the ministers will devote all the time that is necessary to that discussion.
They have even arranged for the Council to continue through Sunday if that is absolutely essential.
Finding an agreement which will enable the Union to operate after the new accessions currently in active preparation is vital for the future of the European Union and indeed the enlarged Union.
The Nice European Council will also be tackling other major issues on which the French Presidency has worked with a great deal of determination.
First, the Charter of Fundamental Rights.
I am glad the European Parliament approved the Convention' s draft by a large majority.
It was also accepted by the Heads of State and Government in Biarritz.
The conditions are now in place for the proclamation of this Charter by the three institutions at Nice.
We will therefore have fulfilled the mandate laid down by the Cologne European Council and the European Union will have at its disposal a very strong benchmark, clearly setting out the rights and values in which it believes.
The discussion on a possible legal status for this Charter will be pursued after Nice and could form part of a broader, longer term debate on the future of the European Union.
The European Council will also discuss the state of progress of the accession negotiations and hence of the enlargement.
You yourselves debated this on 3 October.
As you know, back in July, the French Presidency asked the Commission to step up the accession negotiations and move forward to the crucial issues, the heart of the matter, the problem areas, and prepare a detailed assessment of each candidate' s state of preparedness, the progress of all the negotiations and problems still to be resolved by and for each country.
Our objective was to prepare an overview of the process and decide how to take it forward from this point.
At the General Affairs Council of 20 November we had a very good debate based on the excellent documents the Commission had forwarded to the Council.
I think the stepping up of the negotiations has been widely welcomed and at the next General Affairs Council, and then at the European Council, we will be able to adopt a clear and ambitious line for the continuation of the discussions on the basis of the principles set in Helsinki, which should lead directly to the desired outcome.
At Nice, the European Council will be preceded by a summit meeting of the European Conference.
A meeting of that conference has just taken place at ministerial level, at Sochaux.
At the Nice meeting there will be an exchange of views with all the candidate countries on the reform of the European Union' s institutions, and more generally on the outlook for the future of Europe.
Your President is invited, of course.
By bringing the existing Member States of the European Union and the countries which will eventually belong to it together around one table, I believe the European Conference plays a unique and valuable role.
I hope we can profit from it even more in the future, notably by opening it up to other European countries.
A brief mention of the European defence system: some important decisions will be submitted to the European Council, but I will come back to that later, in the debate on Mrs Lalumière' s report.
Finally, the Nice European Council will reflect the priority the French Presidency accords to economic and social issues and all the issues where the European Union can really respond to the concerns of Europeans.
The many statements the Presidency has presented before Parliament have clearly demonstrated this priority.
Several goals had in fact already been set under the Portuguese Presidency, in Lisbon and Feira.
They should be fulfilled, in economic terms, by building on the efforts to make the European Union give greater priority to growth and employment.
The Lisbon European Council approved guidelines designed to promote an innovative and competitive European economy.
The aim was, in particular, to enrich the broad economic policy guidelines and ensure better coordination with the employment guidelines.
So a report will be passed to the European Council which will finalise the definition of performance indicators in spheres such as employment, innovation, economic reform and social cohesion.
Similarly, employment guidelines are to be forwarded to the European Council together with an Autumn 2000 employment package.
As you know, last Monday the Ecofin Council reached a decisive agreement on fiscal harmonisation.
These matters had been under discussion for several months, not to say several years, arousing strong reservations on the part of some Member States.
So this is a very important step forward by the whole Fifteen, and the European Council will certainly take formal note of it.
The development of Europe' s social dimension is a vital complement to the considerable advances on the economic front.
In this sphere, following on from Lisbon, the French Presidency made the adoption of the social agenda one of its priorities.
The Presidency invited all the institutions concerned - this Parliament, but equally the Economic and Social Committee, the Committee of the Regions, European social partners and the intergovernmental organisations - to contribute to drawing up this agenda.
This social agenda, largely inspired by a Commission communication, was approved yesterday by the Employment and Social Affairs Council.
This has been a good week for working conditions in Europe.
The social agenda draws together the objectives and initiatives which need to be taken over the next five to ten years, particularly in the areas of labour law, social protection, social mobility, lifelong training, and the fight against discrimination and exclusion.
It will be forwarded to Nice, where we naturally hope it will be endorsed.
The protection of employees' rights and improvement of their working conditions have also been high on the French Presidency' s agenda.
The European Council will thus be informed of the state of progress of the negotiations on the directive on the information and consultation of workers, and on the European company project, assuming these issues have not already been settled by then, as unfortunately they are running into persistent opposition.
Following on from Lisbon, the French Presidency had also set itself the objective of strengthening Europe' s knowledge-based society.
Here the Council has approved a plan of action to remove obstacles to the mobility of students, teachers and researchers.
This action plan will also be forwarded to the Nice European Council.
So you can see that I am certainly not exaggerating when I say we have an important agenda and a very full agenda for the Nice Council.
Moreover, on the basis of the Feira conclusions for the implementation of a Commission Action Plan "e-Europe 2002 - an information society for all" , the Council has worked on progress indicators.
A report on the measures the Presidency has taken in this area will be presented to the European Council in Nice.
Consumer protection is an increasing concern for Europeans, for obvious reasons which I need not expand upon.
The French Presidency set itself the objective of improving the definition of the precautionary principle.
A group was therefore set up at the beginning of the presidency' s term in order to work on this. The resulting resolution will be examined tomorrow by the Internal Market Council, again with a view to the Nice Council.
Current events mean that the subject of food safety and, in particular, the establishment of an independent European food agency will be discussed extensively by the Heads of State and Government in Nice.
Another increasing source of concern for Europeans, related to the development of maritime traffic and the occasional disadvantages arising form this, is the safety of maritime transport.
A first package of measures was approved at the October Transport Council. The Biarritz European Council took note of the Commission report on the necessary additional measures.
I know that the European Parliament is working on the first package. You know, moreover, the importance which Member States attach to adopting texts quickly.
Without prejudice to Parliament' s prerogatives, the Presidency has in addition called for the implementation of these measures to be brought forward, where possible.
This entire area must be given fresh political impetus in Nice with a view to the final Transport Council on 20 and 21 December, for it is true that the French Presidency does not come to an end in Nice.
The French Presidency wished to support the updating of the Commission' s 1996 communication on the services of general economic interest with some consideration of the place of public services or, to use the accepted term, general interest services in Europe.
The Presidency wanted to restate the basic principles governing the Community' s approach in this area, including primarily the freedom of Member States to define and organise their own public services while respecting the rules of the Treaty.
These principles will be highlighted in a statement which the Presidency wishes to annex to the Nice conclusions.
Finally, we have prepared a statement for the European Council on the specific economic, social and cultural characteristics of sport and its social functions in Europe.
You can see that we have a very full discussion programme for Nice.
Your President will naturally have the opportunity to express the views of your institution on all these subjects and to discuss them with the Heads of State and Government.
Madam President, Minister, ladies and gentlemen, next week the European Council meets in Nice.
This summit gives the Heads of State and Government an historic opportunity that they cannot afford to miss.
It will, indeed, provide the opportunity to address a range of issues: to focus on the road map for enlargement, to consolidate the Lisbon process and a social agenda and to proclaim the Charter of Fundamental Rights.
These are all important issues, but today, at your suggestion, I want to focus on the important decisions to be taken in Nice.
There are several aspects to this debate, and I will touch briefly on three of them: firstly, the need to close the Intergovernmental Conference by adopting a treaty that has genuine added value; secondly, our security policy on crisis management; and finally, the need to mark out the way beyond Nice.
First, then, a new treaty.
The primary purpose of a new treaty is to ensure that the Union will continue to be able to function after enlargement.
Our institutions, originally designed for six Member States, will soon have to manage a Union nearly five times that size.
We must be ready for this dramatic enlargement.
Any left-overs from Nice would hamper our progress.
We require the candidate countries to meet all the criteria before accession: we too must live up to our obligations.
This means ensuring that the Union can take effective and democratic decisions which fulfil the expectations of Europe's citizens.
Throughout last winter, the Commission devoted a lot of energy to explaining why and on what specific issues the initial agenda of the IGC was to be extended.
In particular, in our written opinion at the end of January, we established the minimum degree of ambition necessary to secure a successful outcome for the Conference.
I am now pleased to say that the negotiators are close to an agreement on the provisions governing, for example, closer cooperation, the Court of Justice, the democratic values of Article 7 and deepening the involvement of European political parties in the democratic life of our Member States and institutions.
I sense that we are approaching a reasonable compromise on the composition of the Commission and the weighting of votes in the Council.
Provided that a number of basic principles are respected, I believe that the Conference can go ahead and reach an agreement on those issues that satisfies the expectations and needs of both large and small countries.
Whatever the number of Commissioners, the important thing is to give the President of the Commission all the powers needed to run the College effectively.
Similarly, any change in the weighting of votes in the Council must also guarantee that decisions cannot be taken against the will of the majority of Member States.
And the simplest and best way to do so is through a double majority system, even if we are aware of the difficulties this will entail.
So we are slowly moving in the right direction.
However, there is one issue on which our lack of progress causes me great concern, and in the view of both our institutions, it is the single most important issue facing us as we prepare for enlargement.
It is the issue of qualified majority voting. If the Union is to be effective, the Conference must make substantial progress on this, and that also means extending the codecision procedure.
(Applause)Member States naturally find it politically difficult to give up the right of veto in sensitive areas such as social policy, asylum and immigration, common trade policy, cohesion and taxation, even when this relates only to the technical changes necessary to make the single market work.
However, if everybody sticks to their position, we will all be worse off.
Indeed, mathematics and 50 years of experience show beyond a doubt that even modest enlargements make it far more difficult to reach unanimous agreements.
In a Union of 27 or more Member States, the unanimity requirement will, quite simply, paralyse progress in every area where it is maintained.
Mark my words: if the Member States' veto on justice and home affairs is maintained, we shall be severely delayed in implementing the programme agreed at Tampere or even unable to do so.
And I shall say so loud and clear to the Heads of States and Government at Nice. They must be under no illusions about this.
The particularly sensitive areas I have been talking about include trade policy.
This is a subject I would like to dwell on for a moment, because the House made a point of highlighting it on today's agenda.
As you know, modern economic activity revolves around services.
Under the present rules, certain aspects of negotiations on services are covered by the unanimity requirement, precisely because our Treaties were originally commercial treaties governing goods and not services.
The problem currently plaguing our trade policy is that, because negotiations cover a wide range of sectors, including services, any progress whatsoever in goods as well as service sectors is almost inevitably held up by unanimity voting.
Our trading partners or, in some cases, we could say our adversaries, are delighted because they can count on 15 potential vetos, and, with enlargement, there will soon be many more.
The situation is then made even worse on those occasions when one of the Member States places conditions, sometimes financial conditions, on its assent.
The simple and natural solution - and this has, in fact, been a majority view during the Conference - would be to change the present rules so that qualified majority voting applies to all aspects of such negotiations, including services.
Regrettably, the Conference's existing text is very complicated, very ambiguous and very long with its two Protocols, and yet, despite its length and complexity, it is also very weak.
It does not provide the simple answer we need to the simple problem we have been facing for so long.
Much remains to be done if we are to find a suitable solution.
For us, the final outcome of Nice will depend largely on the conclusions reached by qualified majority voting.
I am committed to doing whatever it takes to reach an agreement that provides added value.
Inevitably, the question we shall be asked the next morning is: "Are you satisfied with the outcome?"
The Commission will answer that question frankly and directly.
At the next plenary session in Strasbourg, I shall tell this House whether, in my view, the enlarged Union we are all determined to achieve will be able to act effectively or not.
When all is said and done, that is the criterion by which Nice must be judged.
(Applause)
Important decisions will be taken in Nice to ensure that the European Union is able to assume its own responsibilities in the world.
The prevention of conflict and crisis management are traditional areas of Community activity.
It is our task to fulfil our commitments against the backdrop of new ambitious objectives which the Union has set itself.
This means that the Union must develop an autonomous capacity to take decisions and, where NATO itself is not involved, to launch and conduct military operations under Union command in response to international crises.
In this connection, it will be particularly useful to develop fruitful cooperation between the European Union, the United Nations, the OSCE and the Council of Europe.
I would stress that this in no way detracts from the fact that, for the Member States concerned, NATO remains the basis of the collective defence of its members and will continue to play an important role in crisis management.
As we saw in Kosovo, crisis management is not just about imposing a cease-fire.
It is also about keeping warring factions apart, rescuing and evacuating European Union citizens, caring for large numbers of refugees, supplying food and medicine, imposing and maintaining law and order, restoring calm after chaos.
However, crises do not usually erupt overnight. They are the culmination of a process of rising tension in a country or region.
Therefore, one of the key aims of our common foreign and security policy must be to defuse tension and prevent it form turning into armed conflict.
The Community already has many tools for this job. We have had them for a long time.
For example, almost all our external aid programmes are geared to supporting democracy and stability.
What we have to do is coordinate them better and make them more effective, and that is why the Commission is in the process of adopting the necessary internal measures.
The Commission is convinced that only an integrated approach to crises can guarantee the consistency and efficiency necessary for the Union to be able to play its full role on the international scene.
Crisis management requires the Community to show an increased capacity to react, but this must be translated into action in a way that fully respects our institutional framework as established by the Treaties.
We will, of course, need to cooperate with the other institutions and with the High Representative for the CFSP.
In any case, we will have to make decisions about this framework now, because a crisis is the worst possible moment to set attributions and responsibilities.
The discussion which took place within the Conference itself demonstrated that there were issues that were ripe for debate after Nice: the incorporation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights into the Community legal system, as Mr Védrine said; the reorganisation of the Treaties on the basis of existing texts to present the aims and working methods of the Union to the public in a clearer way; making a clear distinction between the competences of the Union and the competences of the Member States; and last, but by no means least, if I am not mistaken about the tone of the debate and about the outlook for Europe's future, the issue of what the balance between the European Union's institutions should look like in the future, in the spirit of an institutional model, the Community model, which has stood the test of time.
We will undoubtedly have much to do after Nice, but that we will have to leave until later.
For now, let us look to the immediate future under the French Presidency and focus on the priority of bringing Nice to a conclusion and paving the way to enlargement.
(Applause)
Madam President, Mr President of the Commission, Mr President of the Council, ladies and gentlemen, may I say to the President of the Council that his country is confronted by a Herculean task, both as the EU presidency and as the French Republic.
It has been stressed on several occasions - and I can endorse everything that President Prodi has said - that a formidable challenge awaits you on the issue of majority voting.
If the reports are correct, France is the country that is still hesitant about a switch to majority voting on matters relating to trade in services.
Mr President of the Council, how can you expect Germany to give ground on asylum and immigration policies?
How can you expect Spain to give ground on the cohesion issue?
How can you expect Austria to give ground on transport policy?
How do you expect the United Kingdom to give ground on fiscal policy, when the presidency, the French Republic, is not budging?
I urge you to move forward, so that you can encourage others to follow suit.
If an acceptable outcome is not achieved on these issues, we shall not hesitate to specify exactly where the responsibility lies in the wake of the Nice summit.
We also believe that, with regard to issues on which we fail to agree to majority decision-making at this stage, you could lay down in the Treaty that the switch to majority voting may be made by a unanimous decision of the Council, for if it is enshrined in the Treaties in that way, there will be no need to revise the Treaties and engage in a lengthy ratification process for each and every extension of majority voting.
You spoke of codecision by the European Parliament.
I welcome that on all issues which are subject to majority voting.
But this means that the right of codecision must also apply to fundamental matters of European agricultural policy, where majority decision-making already exists.
On the reweighting of voting rights in the Council of Ministers, I emphatically endorse what Mr Prodi, the President of the Commission, has said about the double majority being a democratic system, and it really ought to be an acceptable option for the French Republic to operate in this way in its relations with another Member State in a particular coordination process.
So we do need a reweighting of voting rights with a view to ensuring that a majority of states which are home to a minority of the European population cannot ultimately make the rules; the unequivocal democratic principle must certainly prevail here.
And now to the Commission.
We have been astonished to see the way in which the large countries have practised a policy of arrogance in recent months - and the term is not my own but has been used quite frequently by members of my group from smaller countries.
The large nations have seen fit to exert pressure on the smaller ones so that the latter will agree to give up their permanent representation on the Commission.
May I say to the President of the Council that it is certainly possible to discuss rotating membership of the Commission, but the small Member States' permanent seat on the Commission will only become negotiable once the office of President of the Commission has been strengthened, once he has been given the right to dismiss a Member of the Commission, for example.
What we need now in the first instance is for the Commission to be strengthened as an organ of the Community; if you do that and furnish proof that we are not regressing into mere intergovernmental cooperation, if you strengthen the Commission, we can then start thinking one day about how to create a new system of representation.
But we must heed this warning: respect the dignity of the small countries, because the small countries have always borne the brunt of disputes between major powers throughout the history of our continent; for that reason, we must uphold the dignity of Europe's small countries.
(Applause)
As far as enhanced cooperation is concerned, I agree with what you have said.
We are pleased that the secretariats are no longer on the agenda, and even our British friends, who normally adopt quite different positions to the majority of our group on questions of institutional development - while still remaining good friends - fully subscribe to our view that these secretariats must not be created but that all cooperation between Member States must be conducted within the framework of Community procedures.
The Commission must be involved, Parliament must have a say, and nobody may be excluded.
Finally, let me deal with the question of the Charter.
The majority of our group take the view that the Charter should not only be ceremonially proclaimed but should also become European law.
I know and regret that this will not be achieved in Nice.
Further steps, however, will have to follow.
We shall arrive at a result in Nice, Mr President of the Council, but let me say categorically that, if we only obtain a minimal result, the words of President Jacques Chirac will be fulfilled and we shall have no treaty.
If the result is a poor treaty, a rather unambitious, minimalist treaty that does not lay sound foundations for enlargement of the European Union, the failure of Nice should be admitted and the baton handed over to the Swedes and later to the Belgians so that we can then achieve a result which, if all goes well, will be a good basis for enlargement.
We truly desire a result in Nice, but it must be a result that sets out ambitious aims, and my wish for you is that we achieve such a result, that we set an agenda which transcends Nice and focuses on issues such as the basic governmental structure of Europe and the division of powers, in other words what the responsibilities of the Union are and what are matters for the individual nation states.
This is something else that we need for the future.
One last remark, which I make with absolutely no polemical undertone, is that in Strasbourg in January 1995 I heard François Mitterrand speaking.
As we all know, he belonged to your family of political parties, and when I follow some of the party congresses in your country, I often wish that the European enthusiasm of François Mitterrand could be found in his successors.
I wish you some of that enthusiasm, so that we can obtain a good result in Nice, a good result for all of us and for Europe.
(Applause)
I agree totally with the sentiment of President Prodi that this is an historic opportunity and one that should not be lost.
The Summit at Nice bears a responsibility for Europe and should in part fulfil a contract which we made at Helsinki last December and which we should deliver on.
Two things were said at Helsinki to candidate states in Europe.
Two locks were placed on the door of enlargement.
One was that those candidate states themselves must adopt and implement the 'acquis communautaire'; that is their task shared with us.
The second lock on the door is that we ourselves, as fifteen, needed to recognise the fundamental need to reform how we do business in order to continue to do business effectively, indeed to begin to do business even more effectively than at present.
That is the unavoidable and minimum requirement of Nice and it is a major and central target.
We in this Parliament will be required at the end of that process to give or not to give our assent.
It is a major responsibility.
I speak for a group which is totally committed to the earliest feasible enlargement of the European Union.
I also say that we will listen with great care to what Mr Prodi and the Commission say by way of analysis of the Nice Treaty and to the candour which he promises.
We ourselves will go through a very candid analysis.
My appeal to you, Mr President-in-Office, is to present us in this Parliament a document worthy of this Parliament's assent and a document worthy of the scale of the historic challenge we face in Europe.
That challenge is the reunification of our old continent; that challenge is an enlargement unparalleled in scale and that is what Nice must prepare us for.
To do less than that is to fail Europe and this House, when it reviews Nice, cannot allow Europe to fail.
I should like to say, with regard to a number of the specific points, that my group believes that, at this stage of evolution of the European Union, having one national for each Member State of the Commission still remains a sensible proposition and enhances the legitimacy of the Union.
It should not become an issue which traduces the Union into a false contest between the interests of the large and the small, when the common European interest should be the central goal.
My group, at this stage, would prefer a reweighting of votes, the double majority, but you have explained that other issues are under review.
We support enhanced cooperation but insist that it must be open-ended and open to all and not exclusive and must be based and rooted in a way which respects the 'acquis communautaire'.
We are deeply attached to the Charter of Fundamental Rights and we do not want simply to declaim the Charter.
If we proclaim it as something with meaning, it must find roots, and we still commend to you to root it in Article 6.
We commend to you to give the proclamation a meaning in substance, even if it is not yet fully and completely in such a case judiciable.
We support the review of Article 7 because the Austrian lesson has taught the need of it.
Nice is a test to see if our old continent is ready for a new, continental-scale enlargement.
I believe that we can succeed but, Mr President-in-Office, we need your Presidency to mobilise the Council for Europe by animating the Nice Council to achieve something which is genuinely historic.
There should not merely be constructive compromise, those were your words, there must be significant achievement.
We will set the bar high and I hope together, Council, Commission and Parliament, we can clear that bar.
I say this today, if the bar is compromised and is too low, we will refuse to consider it and we will do so for Europe and we will do it in good conscience.
Madam President, the most important aim of the Nice Summit is enlargement of the European Union and the EU' s preparation for this enlargement.
I might also add, on behalf of my group, that we are fully committed to enlargement taking place as soon as possible.
However, it is important at this stage to discuss what is to happen post-Nice.
For this we need vision, and this vision has been expressed over the last few months.
Our group strongly supports constitutionalising the European Union Treaties, and this also means that the reform of the Treaties should be open, with civil society being able to participate in this process.
We consider the Charter of Fundamental Rights to be a success.
It certainly could have been worded better, and, indeed, it can be honed and polished after Nice.
No doubt in time it will come to form a part of the European Union' s constitution.
But we wish there were at least a reference to it in Article 6 of the Treaty on European Union, as our citizens should be already benefiting from this Charter.
As regards decisions that are at present closer to us, we cannot emphasise enough the importance of qualified majority decisions.
The Nice Summit cannot succeed unless the system of qualified majority voting is extended.
It is very important that the European Parliament is closely involved in the codecision procedure, as, otherwise, it will be even more difficult than before to decide on legislation.
The European Parliament will bring transparency to this decision-making process. Let us take the example of environment taxation.
In our discussions on climate policy we often criticise the United States of America for not wanting to compromise its sovereignty and enter into international agreements on climate protection, but there are Member States among us which also insist on keeping what they imagine is their sovereignty intact, and which do not wish to switch to a system of qualified majority decisions, for example, in the matter of environmental taxation.
We have to break free from this.
President Prodi spoke on the subject of trade policy.
We all certainly want the European Union to have a strong role in the globalising world, but, Mr Prodi, our group sees trade policy becoming open and transparent as a precondition to the Commission having more powers, and, at present, that is not the case.
Finally, I would also like to say that it is important at present to ensure that the European Union does not become a community just for the big Member States.
One issue Parliament has had problems with is that we should realise that Parliament' s size in the future cannot be categorically limited to 700, as this would also limit the manifestation of pluralism here in Parliament. That would result in a shift towards a two-party system, and that cannot be democratic.
I would appeal to Mr Barón Crespo for understanding in this matter, as I have a feeling that the other Group Chairmen do support this aim to leave the matter of the size of the European Parliament to some extent open.
This would be a very important position for Parliament to adopt, and we will be able to vote on it tomorrow.
Madam President, Mr President of the Council, Mr President of the Commission, I do not believe that the Governments of the 15 Member States have covered themselves in glory.
The euro bobs feebly up and down in the shallows, responsibility for BSE is shuttled about in a deadly game of pass-the-parcel, and, as the Union prepares to face the greatest challenge in its history, the governments, instead of vigorously addressing the urgent problems, are still embroiled behind closed doors in petty squabbling about the so-called Amsterdam leftovers.
The moment of truth is approaching in Nice.
The summit will only be a success if it opts for truly comprehensive reform of the institutions and sends a clear signal that this Union is capable of enlargement.
This means that there must be an efficient and strengthened Commission which is able to perform its function as the engine of integration.
It also implies a balanced distribution of voting rights among the large and small states in the Council, and it means that majority decision-making in the Council must become the norm, even for key policy areas such as taxes, social policy, justice and home affairs.
If democracy is to be strengthened, this naturally implies that majority voting must be accompanied by a right of codecision for the European Parliament.
But success in Nice also means that there must be more than mere proclamation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights.
I find it quite intolerable that several governments have simply brushed aside the question of including a reference to the Charter in Article 6 of the Treaty.
Let me say clearly, just as other Members before me have done, that in my view a reference to the Charter in the Treaty is just as indispensable as a broad public debate with the people of the Union.
To the Presidents of the Council and the Commission, may I say that the Union has no need of a military reaction force or of arms modernisation programmes that devour billions.
The real success or failure of Nice will be measured by whether governments finally begin to take people's concerns and needs seriously.
It is a good thing that thousands will be taking to the streets of Nice and actively demanding a socially responsive Europe.
The European Union must attach foremost political priority to the struggle against unemployment, poverty and social exclusion.
I note that the French Presidency of the Council intends to devote itself to this cause, but please, Minister, convey to your colleagues that deeds, not words, are what will count.
Madam President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, a week away from the Nice European Council, we are forced to note that it is still not very clear what institutional measures are going to be adopted.
It is highly like that, on the last night of the Council, measures will be adopted which our national parliaments will not have discussed properly and which they will then be required to ratify for the sake of a forced compromise.
This is not an appropriate method.
Matters are particularly vague regarding the, to my mind, key issue of the potential extension of majority voting within the Council, particular on two truly vital issues.
Firstly, Article 67 on the free movement of persons and on immigration policy.
Commitments were made at the time of the Treaty of Amsterdam to the effect that this matter would not be opened for discussion again for five years.
As usual, however, commitments have not been kept. As much as we think international cooperation is essential, we find it unacceptable to use majority voting to force the hand of one or more Member States on such issues of sovereignty.
Another avenue must be explored, one that is more flexible and more respectful of the decisions of each Member State: the avenue of 'differentiated cooperation' .
There is another area of uncertainty involving the extension of the Community procedures of Article 133 to the negotiation of international agreements on services, intellectual property and investments.
Trade talks have already been communitised, but if the Commission is indeed speaking with a single voice, then this voice is not sufficiently controlled by the Member States.
The disastrous consequences of this became apparent in the Uruguay Round.
Let us not start again tomorrow with a new multilateral agreement on investment or new talks on agriculture post Seattle.
In trade policy, the key issue today is not extending majority voting but rather restoring the Council' s authority over the Commission and establishing proper scrutiny by the national parliaments.
In a word, Mr President-in-Office, stand firm on this.
Let us first step up democracy and restore the control of the Member States, then we shall look into transferring jurisdiction.
Madam President, I am speaking on behalf of the radical Members of the Group.
Mr President-in-Office of the Council, Mr President of the Commission, it appears that all the speeches, including the last one, although from the most extreme positions opposite to my own nevertheless come to the same conclusion, and that is that, just a few days away from the Nice Summit, we are not on the finishing straight but, rather than resolving our problems by this antiquated intergovernmental conference method - which, as has been stressed, must be changed - rather than approaching good solutions, we have complicated matters and proposed solutions which are frankly unacceptable.
I refer, of course, to the Charter of Fundamental Rights, a Charter upon which we abstained precisely because we knew that you were bound to sweep it under the carpet after the Nice Summit, having deceived our peoples into believing that it was a binding document protecting and promoting rights.
You do not even intend to incorporate it into the Treaty, evidence indeed that this text, this exercise was always destined to be laid aside.
We are also concerned by the future of the Commission, the driving force of European integration which, when expanded to 20, 25 or 30 members, will clearly be reduced to an administrative secretariat, a technical secretariat of the Council, a body unable to play even the tiniest role in the institutional balance intended by the founding fathers.
Over qualified majority voting and weighting, there will, in all probability, be vetos from all sides which will paralyse the demands of Parliament and the public for a move towards democratisation of our system, towards making majority voting the general rule.
I therefore appeal to President Prodi, who has rightly promised that he will tell us in Strasbourg whether or not the Commission will be able act effectively, whether or not the Union will be able to act effectively after the Nice Summit.
President Prodi, you are going to take part in the Nice Summit, you will in a way be the expression of the will of Parliament, albeit a timidly expressed will, the will which tomorrow will become clear when we vote on the document which has resulted from the compromise between groups and which we have not signed.
Mr Prodi, present your objections to the Summit, assume the responsibility, not of establishing a role for us as the post-Nice panel of judges, but of playing right to the very last the card of defending first and foremost the European institutions, the Commission and Parliament in particular.
Mr President, the draft Nice treaty is more like a constitution for a federal State than an agreement for an association of States.
As a rule, the European Union' s laws are to be adopted by qualified majority voting so that all democracies in the individual countries can be voted down.
There are still 65 categories of legislation requiring unanimity according to the Treaty of Amsterdam.
It is now proposed that decisions should be made by qualified majority voting in 49 of these areas.
We are therefore approaching the point of no return, beyond which a unitary State is unavoidable.
The powers to be given to the EU by the Treaty of Nice treaty go beyond those exercised at federal level in many federal States.
The inner sanctum of the national States is now being penetrated, with majority decision making on aspects of social policy, labour market policy, taxes, industrial policy, culture, supranational parties and even our own salaries, so that we are becoming the EU' s highly paid representatives in the Member States instead of the voters' representatives in the European Parliament, duly taxed in our own countries.
Home affairs and legal policy are to be subject to majority voting as from 2004.
Trade policy will make the EU countries resemble a State.
We shall have to speak with just one disagreeable voice in the WTO.
Decisions on foreign and security policy are also to be adopted on the basis of majority voting.
Only on the subject of defence is unanimity still to be required.
Otherwise, the right of veto will not figure very prominently in the new treaty, and countries without the right of veto resemble constituent States more than independent nations.
Majority voting internally and joint representation abroad - this is clearly the blueprint for a State.
What has been deferred to the constitutional conference in 2004 is not the content of the text but merely the icing on the cake of a text which may also come to resemble a proper constitution, that is to say a text containing firstly the Charter of Fundamental Rights, then the ground rules and, finally, an appendix listing the individual policies to which changes may be made without the need for tiresome ratification.
All that is missing is democracy.
Democracy was forgotten en route.
And that is the essential problem with the Treaties of Maastricht, Amsterdam and Nice.
More majority decision-making in which officials and ministers can vote down the electorate and elected representatives.
In democracies, it is the other way around.
Majority decision-making will destroy the right of veto for the Member States as parliamentary democracies, but the EU will not itself become a parliamentary democracy.
With enhanced cooperation, the right of veto over treaty changes is also destroyed - not formally, but in practice - because a qualified majority will in future be able to ignore resistance from, for example, Denmark, Sweden and Great Britain or other places in which the undemocratic idea might arise of asking the electorate what it thinks.
The federalists can achieve their desire for more integration, and the governments in Sweden, Great Britain and Denmark can ease their countries into the new arrangements once the decisions, binding in practice, have been taken.
Nice will transfer so much power from the electorate that it ought to be treated as a genuine constitutional change and only come into force once it has been approved in referendums in those countries in which referendums are possible.
Mr President, the very title of this item on our agenda indicates the importance of Article 133 in the debate on the extension of qualified majority voting.
While its extension to trade in services is an understandable aim, it has little to do with the main issue of institutional reform, which needs to be resolved as a matter of priority; the demand contained in point 7 of the joint resolution regarding the extension of external negotiating competence in the field of trade to cover investment has even less to do with this main issue.
In view of the rather dim prospects of success, I do not think it would be a wise move to burden the Intergovernmental Conference with another complex and controversial topic.
Given the current state of negotiations, it is doubtful whether even an extension of the conference to the Sunday, along with the customary extra hour that is gained when the clocks go back, would be sufficient to ensure that this question, along with all the others, will be properly resolved.
Mr President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, Mr Prodi, what matters most as far as the PPE-DE Group is concerned, is for the IGC to reach a successful conclusion.
We believe this is crucial if we are to take a major step towards rapid enlargement of the European Union.
Just imagine what the countries of Central and Eastern Europe are making of the events in Nice.
Elections have just taken place in Romania, and we have been shocked at the outcome and the rise of a very extremist party.
Elections are due to take place in Poland and Bulgaria early next year, and how are we to motivate the people of these countries if the European Union should prove unequal to the task of producing a sound treaty in Nice?
The European Union needs some good news.
A poor agreement would prove that our Heads of Government do not attach any priority to the enlargement of the European Union.
How can we invest with a view to gaining broader support among EU citizens for further enlargement, if our own Heads of Government should prove unable to negotiate a sound treaty?
But according to our heads of government, it is also a question of demonstrating that there is no adequate solution to the major issues confronting us in the European Union.
BSE, security, foreign policy and defence, Europe' s competitiveness vis-à-vis the United States; it is no longer possible for any issues of this kind to be resolved at national level.
It is therefore no way to tackle the fact that the decision-making process within the European Union is still akin to wading through treacle.
Mr President, Europe needs leadership, clarity, choices and decisiveness.
That is what the people actually want to see.
In view of the extent to which public confidence has been undermined with regard to the euro, people need to see that we are taking steps forward.
So I feel it is the weighty task of the French Presidency to at last whip up some enthusiasm for Nice.
It is extremely sad that a situation has developed where large and small countries have come to take opposite sides.
I feel it is a psychological error of the first order that such a huge amount of distrust has been generated.
I would urge the French Presidency to do their utmost to overcome this divide, because it is extremely destructive.
We believe the Commission' s role to be essential.
The Commission is, and remains, the driving force, and if the Commission does not emerge from Nice in a stronger position then it will be a black day for Europe.
So I think what we need to do is work more with the Commission and less at intergovernmental level.
We will assess the outcome of Nice on the basis of whether it leads to enhanced effectiveness, and efficiency, greater democracy and transparency, and that is what is on the agenda.
The IGC still seems to be experiencing problems with the extension of qualified voting within the Council.
Perhaps we should shift the focus to the issue of extending codecision with the Parliament.
Parliament has proved itself a mature partner with the Council in the codecision procedure where it presently pertains.
Parliament has also proved itself a serious partner within the drafting of the Charter, and it would be especially refreshing should British Prime Minister Blair publicly recognise that fact.
At present the spread of codecision is neither logical nor does it accord with precise criteria.
Although the previous Treaty made some progress in extending the formula, it also brought in the crazy formula of codecision plus unanimity for citizenship, social security, the rights of the self-employed and also cultural policy.
The Treaty of Nice should stop that practice and extend codecision to some thirty further policy sectors, including competition policy, farm and fisheries, structural funds, state aids, trans-European networks, research and development and also citizenship.
At a time when crude balance of power questions are proving fairly problematical for the IGC, surely it is sensible for it to focus on building up cooperation and trust with the Parliament and developing post-national European democracy as fast as possible.
Mr President, here we are on the eve of another European Summit which will see many of us out on the streets of Nice together with millions of citizens.
Like them, we will be unable to influence the outcome of the negotiations.
Mr Prodi, I am extremely concerned at what might be the outcome of the final night of the negotiations, that night when the victors are usually those with the greatest resistance to tiredness and boredom, that night which everyone sees as the last chance to resolve the points which are still without solutions.
This is the most negative, most undemocratic part of the intergovernmental method: the whims of the human element, the results of last-minute bargaining and the obligation to achieve a result at all costs.
I am extremely afraid that we will end up with some rather strange measures such as a Senate of national Members of Parliament, a Mr Euro or a Mr WTO, further diminishing of Parliament's powers or further marginalisation of Parliament, or some other protocol such as that proposed on the WTO which, if it were adopted, would reduce the Commission to a puppy dog on multiple leashes held by many different owners, each one pulling in a different direction.
Those who are in Nice, out on the streets and in the dozens of forums and meetings scheduled will, in my opinion, at least be able to push for one result, namely that this will be the last IGC, that the hazy reflection on the future of Europe Mr Védrine spoke of will translate into the launch at Nice of a process which will establish the time frames and methods for drawing up and adopting a democratic European Constitution.
One last word on the subject of Parliament, ladies and gentlemen, and the bold words we have heard this morning. Be careful lest we repeat the painful fiasco of the last enlargement when, after months of threats, the European Parliament gave in to the governments.
I hope that this will not be the case this time as well.
Mr President, I was involved in securing Denmark' s positive vote against the Treaty of Maastricht in 1992.
I shall adopt a position on the Treaty of Nice when I see the outcome of the negotiations, but there is a somewhat schizophrenic feel to the debates here.
At one moment, we talk about bringing the European Union closer to the people, and the next moment we are in the throes of developing a European State, which is out of step with what the people want.
In my view, the most important thing to do at the Nice Summit is to set a timetable for when and how the EU is to become ready for enlargement.
We are focusing far too much on how prepared the applicant States are, and we all too often ignore the fact that, for example, the EU' s agricultural arrangements and Structural Funds are enormous obstacles to enlargement.
A decision in Nice to the effect that, for example, the applicant States must have the opportunity to participate in the next elections to the European Parliament could help put the necessary pressure on the EU itself, so that enlargement can become a reality.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, in his declaration of 9 May 1950, Robert Schuman stated that: "Europe will not be made all at once, or according to a single plan. It will be built through concrete achievements, which first create a de facto solidarity." .
I think that it is timely, on the eve of the Nice Summit, to question the current state of this spirit of "de facto solidarity" , without which, European integration can be clearly neither genuine nor authentic.
With regard to the conclusion of the IGC, what must take place in Nice is that an agreement must be reached which whilst correcting the deficit in the functioning of the European institutions, does not affect the existing balance between Member States and, of course, between these States and the Union.
The very fact that this issue is being debated now is in itself a clear sign of the failure of a policy to strengthen ties of mutual trust between the countries that comprise the Union.
We are not the only ones to say this; the French Presidency has also said as much through its minister, Mr Moscovici, who acknowledged in a recent interview that the positions that have been adopted during the course of this year, particularly by President Chirac and by the German Minister for Foreign Affairs, Joschka Fischer, on the future organisation of the Union have had the direct effect of heightening a climate of mistrust between small and large Member States, which will inevitably be reflected in the results of the Nice European Council.
I am talking here about the idea of creating a vanguard of countries centred on the Paris­Berlin axis, which would culminate in a remodelling of Europe or in a dangerous confusion between a heterogeneous Europe, which is healthy, and a two-speed or multi-speed Europe, which is dangerous.
Furthermore, the text of the proposal for a compromise resolution that we will be voting on reflects this unease to a certain extent, because its generic nature is clear to see.
It is also, however, a text in which its authors, even in the knowledge that they risk predictable political failure, reveal a vision that is focused above all on the powers and competences of the European Parliament itself, and call for ever greater resources for parliamentary intervention without dedicating a single word to the crucial role of national parliaments.
The reality is nevertheless quite different.
We all know that the purpose of the Nice Summit is to finalise the work of a conference held between governments, who are accountable not to the European Parliament but to their own national parliaments, which categorically demonstrates the sovereign nature of this process of revising the Treaties.
To conclude, Mr President, I wish to express the desire that the Nice Summit is a success from the point of view that I have been talking about, which is that its conclusions should express a joint formulation of the various national wills that come together and work together in an ongoing quest for cohesion and development, ultimately taking a few more steps towards the "de facto solidarity" of which Robert Schuman spoke.
Mr President, Mr President of the Council, Mr President of the Commission, today at talks in the House, the President of Latvia directed this reproachful remark at us: "We have been doing our homework!"
The question is whether the Heads of State and Government of the European Union have been doing their homework too.
This raises a huge question mark at the present time.
In Amsterdam, the Heads of State and Government failed their exams, and now they have to go to Nice to resit them.
A failed resit has to be regarded as a crisis in any school career, and I fear that another mass failure may well be on the cards.
Let me use another metaphor.
European unification is a marathon in which we have successfully stayed the course over the past few decades.
The stadium is now in sight.
Do we have the strength and determination to complete the final lap, or shall we miss the entrance to the stadium because we have lost our bearings?
This is the question that has to be asked in Nice, and I hope that we have the strength to emerge from the enlargement process with a robust Union, because enlargement must not weaken the Union.
For this reason, the European Parliament believes that two conditions must be fulfilled.
The first is that qualified-majority voting must be extended, but this extension must not focus on areas of relatively minor importance.
Forty areas can be listed in which voting by qualified majority is to be introduced, areas such as the appointment of members to the Committee of the Regions.
I would gladly give up these 40 extensions if we could achieve majority voting in five areas where substantive progress can be made, such as trade, social policy, justice and home affairs, structural policy and taxation, to name the most important.
Our appeal to the Heads of State and Government is that each of them should put his playthings into the communal toy box, so that the others will do likewise, rather than each waiting for the others to make the first move and then nothing happening at all.
This, quite simply, is the situation in which we have been stuck for months at the Intergovernmental Conference, because none of them are willing to give up their toys.
I hope that, at the start of the ministerial meeting of the intergovernmental conference, someone will have the backbone to give up his toys in order to pressurise the others into making a move.
Secondly, the democratic deficit must not start to widen again.
In Amsterdam, it was decided that qualified-majority voting should always be accompanied by codecision.
Any derogation from this rule will fuel the democratic deficit and undermine the progress made in Amsterdam.
I hope this will not happen.
There are also a few leftovers to be tidied up in the fields of competition policy, monetary union and agricultural policy, so that a right of codecision can be established in these areas too.
At the Intergovernmental Conference, we must also strike a fair balance between the large and the small nations.
I should like to emphasise that the population of Europe consider themselves to be represented in the European Parliament, and Parliament must reflect this.
If the disparity between the large and the small members of the Council becomes too great, we face the risk of a legitimacy crisis within the European Union in a few years' time, because the small countries will no longer feel comfortable in the Council, fearing that they might become unable to defend their own identity.
I believe that, if the two conditions, namely the creation of an effective Union and the reduction of the democratic deficit, are not fulfilled, the European Union could be confronted for the first time with a situation in which this European Parliament refuses to ratify a treaty.
(Applause from the right and centre)
Mr President, the Parliamentary Committee on Constitutional Affairs has followed the progress of the Intergovernmental Conference month by month since it started in February, attentively and with commitment and confidence, confidence particularly in the French Presidency.
It is now the eve of its conclusion and we are aware of the progress which has been made, the partial results which have been achieved, but frankly, over almost ten months of a major Intergovernmental Conference, there has been no rapprochement of the positions, Mr Védrine, and no definition of agreements, not to mention the fact that some of the topics indicated by Parliament in its resolution of 13 April, ranging from the regulation of the economy to the institutional implications of the common defence policy, have not even been debated.
All this is serious cause for reflection on the tortuous and sterile nature of the method followed, a lengthy, repetitive, predominantly technical dialogue lacking the more weighty clarifications and negotiation endeavours at political level which did not take place until much later, in October, and then only on one occasion, at the Biarritz Council.
The experience of this year has convinced us that, looking beyond Nice towards the future of Europe, the process of constitutionalising the Union must not be carried out by means of the - now dysfunctional - method of negotiations between government representatives.
Nice must not be the occasion for the announcement of another Intergovernmental Conference, for this would generate misunderstanding and alarm rather than agreement and hope.
The Committee on Constitutional Affairs has made its contribution in the form of the resolution adopted on 21 November, which draws attention to certain points which are truly vitally important if the outcome of the Conference is to be successful, and I will not go back over them.
I will simply say that these points are deemed absolutely essential by those who believe that it is necessary to advance integration into a larger Union and not to dilute or paralyse it.
We are starting to doubt whether anybody, even at the highest levels, is fully aware of what is at stake.
Recently, Mr President, we have, in fact, witnessed the emergence of an increasingly clear, worrying contradiction which very few governments appear to want to avoid: the contradiction between the courageous decisions which have already been taken, such as those on the single currency, common defence and the major, historical enlargement of the Union, and the reluctance to accept the institutional implications.
If this contradiction is responsible for the negative outcome of the Conference, it will mean a crisis for European integration.
Therefore, it would be better and healthier to have a clear-cut crisis arising from the failure to reach agreement at Nice, than an ambiguous crisis caused by deception aimed at concealing the Conference's failure to deal with points which are vital for the Union's enlargement.
Mr President, even Paris is divided over Nice.
The French President and the First Minister seem to be more obsessed with their own political future than with that of Europe.
The French Presidency has shown little enough consistency, and where it has this has mainly been in terms of its lack of neutrality and the preferential treatment it has given to the large Member States, and that at a time when the Union has never been more in need of a President who looks for consensus.
In order to make room for the newcomers, all Member States need to move a little closer together, but they only do so when they really cannot put off the evil moment any longer.
It seems as if some governments are already reconciling themselves to a new IGC for enlargement.
The governments have lost sight of the urgent need for reforms because they are concentrating too much on their own position of power in the new set-up.
For example, many a country will emphasise that majority decision making must become the general rule, but at the same, will come up with so many exceptions that precious little remains on balance.
If majority voting does not become the general rule then decision-making will become irretrievably deadlocked, as Mr Prodi rightly commented a moment ago.
If this does not go hand-in-hand with codecision then democracy will be further undermined.
The weighting of votes in the Council must do justice to the population numbers in the Member States, which means that it is quite acceptable for there to be some corresponding differences between the larger and smaller countries.
All Member States must retain one Commissioner of their own during this enlargement round.
Only afterwards should we decide on a new system on the basis of the experience we will have gained by then.
If one thing is for certain, Europe is going to undergo radical change, and so let us not run ahead of a situation that we are unable to take stock of as yet.
It would be very desirable to introduce a hierarchy into the Commission, i.e. Vice-Presidents, Commissioners and Under-Commissioners.
In addition, this would afford Parliament more opportunities to discuss issues with politically responsible members of the Commission rather than officials who read out actual texts that they could just as easily have sent.
The Charter does not deserve to be left in a vacuum, with no clear status.
In failing to incorporate the text into the Treaty and only subscribing to it in political terms, we are opening the door to major problems of legal interpretation.
Hence the Charter must be incorporated into a treaty text as soon as possible.
I have this to say to the Heads of Governments: making concessions at the forthcoming summit is not a political defeat but a political triumph: the triumph of the new Europe over the old.
Do not allow any shadows to fall over Nice, and let Paris be the City of Light again.
Mr President I would like to remind the Council and Commission, and indeed the House, of a resolution that we carried on 26 October in relation to better law-making.
We there said that "in accordance with the subsidiarity principle and the political and national diversity of the European Union, the amendments made to the treaties should specifically include recognition of, and respect for, the political and legislative powers of the Members States' internal political units in their executive, legislative and judicial relations with the European Union institutions."
That aspect of subsidiarity has not been heard in our debate today but it is very important.
It bears also in a most important way on the question of the size of this Parliament.
The nations and regions which the parties of the European Free Alliance represent are deeply concerned that if we apply together the maximum of 700 and the current idea of digressive proportionality, the people whom we are able to represent here at the present time will effectively cease to be represented in this House.
That will be a huge loss to European democracy and it will take the institutions further from the people not closer to them.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, for a youngster like me, Nice certainly represents a great hope for a new Europe, in political as well as institutional terms.
Indeed, the wide majority vote returned only yesterday in the Italian Parliament is evidence of the unity of intention and preparation for this Council.
However, we certainly consider it essential that the list of topics to be voted on by qualified majority voting is not extended and that the principle of one Commissioner per Member State is followed when establishing the composition of the Commission.
Another essential factor is that the irreplaceable role of the national parliaments is retained in the Treaties, precisely because this will facilitate the establishment of the new Europe.
It takes no great genius to work out that 700 Members of Parliament can no longer be sufficient for a Europe of 27 or 28 nations, or the smaller countries will be at an unfair disadvantage.
On the other hand, I would stress the considerable importance of providing our Europe with strong institutions to fill the institutional void being created by progress on the economic front with the euro.
As a result, the high dollar is benefiting NAFTA, Mexico, Canada and the United States.
Having said this, in my opinion, Nice needs to be an historic Council, for ourselves, our nations and the very future of Europe.
Mr President, in this Parliament, which is a pluralist parliament, we have today achieved an unusual degree of unanimity amongst the Members who have spoken.
I believe that all the speakers are very concerned about the results of the Nice European Council.
This is not a question - despite what my friend, Elmar Brok, has said - of two exams that we have to pass;
Amsterdam and Nice.
No, this is a much longer-standing issue.
I remember the enlargement of 1995, when the question of institutional issues was already being raised, and I remember a letter from Chancellor Kohl in which he told us to approve enlargement and then the rest would be resolved immediately.
We did so, the enlargement of 1995 went ahead, the discussion group presided over so well by Carlos Westendorp was created, Amsterdam arrived and now we are going to have Nice and practically nothing has changed, Mr President, we go round and round in circles on institutional issues and never find solutions which will allow us to cope with this hugely ambitious task of enlargement to 27 members.
This is what worries us and it worries all this afternoon' s speakers.
This is the message that we wish to send to the European Council through you, Mr President.
You should be aware that we are not going to judge this French Presidency on its considerations of the economic services of general interest, which is a very important issue.
No, we are going to judge it on the mandate of the Nice Conference, which is the same as it was in Finland plus enhanced cooperation.
There are two aspects of this issue that are absolutely fundamental to this Parliament: How will qualified majority voting be extended?
And with this extension, when the decisions are legislative, will there always be codecision with Parliament?
That is the first consideration.
The second one, Mr President, is the Charter of Fundamental Rights.
Institutional issues are not of interest to many people, because they are complicated issues.
The Charter of Fundamental Rights - I have had the opportunity to talk about this in many places - is of interest to people, because they understand and feel strongly about fundamental rights.
I believe that in the Convention we produced good work.
I believe that we have a good Charter and that this Council is going to waste a great political opportunity because, in the proposal you are making, Mr President, the proclamation - the one which my friend and group Chairman, Mr Poettering, calls a freierliche Proklamation - is a proclamation by stealth.
You tell us to proclaim it and leave it at that.
You do so as if you were taking care not to disturb anyone.
Mr President-in-Office of the Council, that is the great political task of this European Council.
If you fail to take advantage of it, I fear that you will return here after the European Council in Nice, other presidencies will come around and this Parliament will be tempted to follow Oscar Wilde' s advice, which was that the best way to avoid temptation was to fall into it, and therefore not approve the Treaty of Nice when the time comes.
Mr President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, Mr President of the Commission, As soon as Nice has finished, it will the European Parliament's turn to reply to two historic questions, questions which affect both the future of the European Union and its own political credibility.
The stated aim of this review is to design more efficient institutions which will be able to cope with an enlarged Europe and, at the same time, to reduce the democratic deficit which certainly exists.
Unfortunately, the text of the Treaty, as formulated to date by the Intergovernmental Conference, does not satisfy either of the objectives of the review and, consequently, does not satisfy either of the two evaluation criteria set by the European Parliament.
In order to ensure that the institutions operate more efficiently, we called for Council decisions to be taken by qualified majority rather than unanimously, although we did, of course, exclude all issues of constitutional significance.
This has borne only meagre fruit, as Elmar Brok and Mr Méndez de Vigo explained earlier.
However, the European Parliament is especially disappointed as regards the major issue of the democratisation of the European Union.
From a democratic point of view, it goes without saying that qualified majority voting in the Council should go hand in glove, as far as legislative acts are concerned, with codecision on the part of the European Parliament.
This does not always hold true.
In the case of enhanced cooperation, no agreement has yet been reached on making provision for assent by the European Parliament in order to start the procedure.
Finally, not only has the Charter of Fundamental Rights not yet been incorporated into the text of the Treaty; it has barely even been agreed to mention it in Article 6.
Of course, I am delighted about the positive aspects, such as the issue of European political parties and Article 7, which have already been commented on.
However, Nice will not be accepted on the basis of these positive aspects.
Obviously, we shall be under great pressure to accept Nice come what may, with talk of the threat of institutional crisis if there is no Treaty.
However, I fear that the crisis will be worse if the European Parliament caves in and accepts as adequate what is clearly an inadequate Treaty.
The national parliaments are waiting for our opinion.
We have an historic responsibility.
Let us not compound the disappointment which Nice will cause if it is unsuccessful by giving the people huge cause for disappointment in Parliament.
Nice, if it is unsuccessful, can make amends, but if Parliament proves to be unreliable, it will take years to wipe the slate clean.
A European Union without a credible parliament is a transient and a poor state of affairs.
Mr President, the debate on Article 133 and commercial policy needs to be part of a much wider effort to bring transparency and democracy to the EU' s decision-making on trade.
This sector is currently one of the most centralised and untransparent.
That was one of the main criticisms of the protestors at Seattle and it will continue to be one of their criticisms at Nice.
Many of us believe that any shift of competence from Member States to the Commission can only be contemplated after a complete restructuring of the EU' s trade policies and processes as a whole, to infuse them with far greater democracy and transparency, and to ensure that they are based on true social and environmental sustainability.
That means it is not only a question of the Parliament having a much greater role in decision-making on trade.
That is, of course, important and I am surprised that others have not mentioned it as it has occupied much of our time in the committee.
But it also means restructuring the Committee 133 itself: making it far more accountable; ensuring that its agenda and conclusions are accessible and that its composition is broad and inclusive.
Only then, President Prodi, will some of us be happy to entrust the Commission with the hugely important areas of services, investment and intellectual property.
Mr President, the EU summit at Nice will hopefully be a further positive step on the road to European integration.
The recent Commission report on the progress of the countries from Central and Eastern Europe who have made application for membership is encouraging I must say.
While not in any way detracting from the aspirations, and indeed the entitlement, of some of those countries to join the Community by 2002, it would not, I believe, be in their best interests, or indeed the interests of Member States, to achieve this deadline without first ensuring an orderly transition with minimum disruption to the economies of existing Member States.
We must not forget that our ultimate goal is to create the economic and social environment to enable the EU to become a dominant player in world trade with the countries of Central and Eastern Europe playing their full part and benefiting from a peaceful and stable European economy.
We have demonstrated in the past that this goal is achievable and as someone from a Member State that has benefited from a planned transition to membership, I look forward in a positive way to an enlarged and peaceful Europe.
However enlargement of the European Union must not dilute or dissipate the influence of smaller Member States with key national interests which must be protected.
From an Irish perspective it is clear that we want to retain our right to nominate one member of the European Commission which controls the administration of the common agricultural policy, fisheries policy, transport policy and other important EU policy areas.
I also believe it is important that we keep control over decisions concerning our tax affairs and social security matters.
Mr President, I am addressing the Commission President and the President-in-Office of the Council in French in order to get my message across as clearly as possible.
In addressing you, I wish to raise an idea put forward by my working party within the PPE-DE Group, and not to discuss the problems that we have as Conservatives.
We have major reservations on many issues, especially the Charter of Fundamental Rights, for various reasons.
I do not wish to discuss that. I shall leave that to others.
My main idea is as follows: to concentrate on what will happen after Nice.
We are aware, from the speeches made by President Chirac in this place in July, that at least three major topics stand out, namely the simplification of the Treaties, the sharing of jurisdiction between European, national and regional levels, what I might term the rights of states in the American expression (Section 10 of the American Constitution), and, thirdly, the balance between the institutions - though here we should especially, perhaps, consider the role of the national parliaments - i.e. how is our institution to be managed in future.
We await a Commission report on this issue of governance.
Would it not be a good idea, before going any further, to consult our peoples and involve them in what we are doing, instead of waiting for the outcome, then subjecting it to a referendum, even though they do not know what has happened? So my third question is this: how is this business going to be managed?
What is the procedure? And who is to participate in the system?
Mr President, are we going to wait until the next IGC, until 2003-2004 before we can have a debate on these fundamental issues?
In my opinion, this is something we should begin directly following the outcome of Nice.
My second area of concern is procedure.
The Chairman of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs is right, we have to forget the IGC, the wise men and the closed doors.
We must instigate a major debate among the citizens of Europe, getting them involved in our debates. My third point concerns participation.
The candidate countries should certainly participate, but not necessarily the countries with which we have not yet started negotiations, such as Turkey. I think that is going a little too far.
In conclusion, I urge you, Mr President-in-Office of the Council and Mr President of the Commission to give some thought to the provisions which would have to be incorporated into the Treaty of Nice in order for us to have this major debate and to avoid the utterly Kremlin-style approach of agreeing matters behind closed doors, in order to instigate debate with a view to a new European framework, whether or not it be constitutional, so that we may have direct contact with our electorate and may make a major success of the European Union in the future.
Mr President, I am speaking not just to the President-in-Office of the Council but also to all the governments of the Member States when I say that if agreement is not reached in Nice on these difficult issues those issues will not go away.
They will not become easier to solve after Nice, they will become more difficult.
So a final major effort is necessary over the next two weeks.
This is no more so than on the issue of qualified majority voting.
Every government is saying we need more qualified majority voting, but they all have their list of exceptions.
The problem is if you put the lists of exceptions next to each other you will find there are very few areas of substance where it is agreed to switch to qualified majority voting.
Everyone will have to sacrifice some of their cherished exceptions if we are to reach a result in Nice.
Of course some governments will be attacked in their Member States by opposition parties, by euro-sceptics, saying, "you are giving up the national right of veto" .
But it has to be understood that if you have the right of veto then so does everyone else.
So in a Union of 27 Member States for every veto you trade in, 26 other vetoes are being given up at the same time.
Consequently, things that you want will no longer be vetoed by others.
Everyone can gain from a system of qualified majority voting.
If we are to have more qualified majority voting on legislation it must go hand in hand with codecision, not only for the new areas which will come to qualified majority voting but also for the existing areas that already come under qualified majority voting.
This is essential for democracy at Union level.
To adopt European legislation you must pass two tests: acceptability to the elected governments meeting in the Council, and acceptability to the directly-elected MEPs in the European Parliament.
These are two safeguards for the quality and the acceptability of European legislation.
It is nothing to be afraid of.
The working of the codecision procedure over the last year shows that it works.
In more than three quarters of the cases we do not even need the Conciliation Committee; the two readings each in Council and Parliament are enough to reach agreement.
If this is working here let us make it work across the whole spectrum of legislation.
Finally, there is the question of the number of seats in the European Parliament.
We know that a definitive solution must be in place for the parliament to be elected in 2009, which will, after all, last until 2014.
By then I am sure we will have enlarged to at least 27 Member States.
But a first transition will also have to be made for the parliament to be elected in 2004 because at least some new Member States will come in before or during the Parliament to be elected in 2004 which will last until 2009.
We must make some room now for enlargement in that Parliament.
If a lot of states come in maybe we will exceed temporarily the limit of 700, but a first adjustment must be made now.
It is easier to make two small steps in this regard rather than one big step so I urge the President to persevere and I urge all governments to make the necessary compromises in Nice.
Mr President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, Mr President of the Commission, ladies and gentlemen.
My dear friend Elmar Brok referred in the House just now to examinations and what students do in order to pass them.
Of course, one of the things which students do in order to pass examinations is to revise beforehand.
I should like to tell you which points I think you should revise if you want to pass your examinations with flying colours.
The first thing you have to do in Nice, Minister, and I say this to you and through you to all your colleagues, is to adopt an agreement which maintains the correlation of powers - large and small - and interinstitutional balance.
Secondly, as far as the matter of the Commission is concerned, you know full well - we all know full well - that the problem with the Commission is not one of numbers.
The problem with the Commission is a qualitative problem.
In other words, we want a new Commission with 27 Commissioners, but we want a Commission which has a political role, which again has a political role, and the president of which has the powers needed for the Commission to do its job.
As far as voting in the Council is concerned, I think that the double majority is the best system because it is more representative and more objective.
As far as extending qualified majority voting is concerned, we are agreed that, unless we make some sort of move in this direction, we shall encounter a great many problems.
So I think that, as a first move, it should already be agreed that trade policy needs to come under qualified majority voting.
As far as foreign policy is concerned, we now live in Mr Solana's bright and beautiful world and let me tell you - if we leave the common foreign policy solely within the framework of intergovernmental cooperation, then we shall be making a big mistake.
The common foreign policy needs to be fully integrated into Community procedure because only then shall we have the necessary safety valves.
Finally, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, I must, of course, mention the Charter, which affects millions of European citizens.
I take the view that Nice must at least accept the compromise called for by the European Parliament, i.e. for the Charter to be combined with Article 6, paragraph 2.
Mr President I wish to focus my speech on three basic points.
The President-in-Office of the Council addressed the issue of closer cooperation and said that we are on the way to reaching consensus on this matter.
I should like to ask both Mr Védrine and President Prodi what role is envisaged or what role they advocate for the Commission in the field of closer cooperation in the second and third pillars.
The second issue concerns the overall agreement already considered here by my colleague and Chairman of the Socialist Group, Enrique Barón Crespo, which is, fortunately, part of the resolution that the European Parliament will surely adopt tomorrow.
Today, neither in the Council nor in Parliament do we have distribution of power that is proportionate to size and to the number of citizens in each Member State.
What we have is a balance underpinned by the principle of the dual legitimacy that exists between the Union of States and the Union of citizens.
According to how one sees the matter, however, what is being prepared now is a change to this balance and an increase in the representation of the larger countries, both in the Council and in Parliament.
This is neither fair nor acceptable.
I therefore wish to insist once again that within the Council, it is the double majority method that should be adopted for decision making, since it is not only more understandable but also fairer.
I would also reiterate that the current method should be maintained in the European Parliament and that this linear reduction should be implemented when new Members enter Parliament.
I believe that this latter approach is more balanced, fairer and takes account of an historical reality which those seeking to integrate Europe cannot ignore. This historical reality is that the Member States exist and there is a relationship between these states and their citizens, whereas there is not such a strong relationship between the citizens and Europe itself.
Lastly, there is the issue of the Charter of Fundamental Rights.
The President-in-Office of the Council spoke with sincerity, for which I thank him.
He said that some countries or governments even say they will not formally recognise the Charter if it is incorporated into the Treaties.
It is unacceptable that such a statement should be made.
What is a member of the European public supposed to think when they hear that governments are prepared to draw up certain documents but do not agree on these documents having legal force and status?
What kind of message are we sending to candidate countries if we say to them that in order to join the single market they must accept whatever we impose on them, and yet we do not require them to ratify the Charter of Fundamental Rights?
In other words, we are sending them the message that in Europe we treat consumers better than we treat the citizens of the European Union themselves.
We therefore encourage and urge the Presidency once again to make every effort to ensure that there is at least one reference to the Treaties in Nice because this would be the best tribute we could pay to the work of the Members of the European Parliament, the Commission and even the representatives of the governments involved in the Convention on drafting the Charter.
Mr President, today the President of Latvia visited the European Parliament.
The story of Mrs Vike Freiberga is illustrative of the courage in adversity shown by the peoples of Central and Eastern Europe.
As a seven year-old girl she was forced to flee her country before the advance of the Red Army, a fugitive hiding in ditches to avoid being strafed by Soviet aircraft.
We might also choose to remember the heroism of Solidarnosc in Poland, the President of the Czech Republic Vaclav Havel, the generations in Hungary since 1956 who have sought to restore their freedom and independence.
On the one hand, Mr Védrine, we see courage and even heroism; on the other we look at the Council of Ministers, the IGC about to assemble in Nice: Do we see courage, resolution, determination to succeed?
At the moment, as your address has demonstrated, we see disunion, squabbling and the prospect of failure.
Will you be able at Nice to support the European Parliament' s resolution which calls upon the preparations to be secure so that the peoples of Central and Eastern Europe may vote in the next European Parliamentary elections in 2004?
Will you, President Prodi and your colleague Commissioner Verheugen, instruct the Commission to open those chapters for the applicant countries who have achieved everything we have so far required so that at Nice we can look the peoples of Central and Eastern Europe in the eye and say: yes, we have succeeded in making the necessary reforms and within the lifetime of one Parliament you will also take your place in Brussels and Strasbourg.
I do not believe that failure is an option.
We have been talking about Amsterdam leftovers.
Our public in the EU and the public in the candidate countries will not accept the prospect of Nice leftovers, of a second IGC in 2004.
I hope that we are in a position to congratulate the French Presidency for its success; but if you fail, we shall be harsh in our condemnation.
Mr President, on the face of it, the Nice Summit is all about making the necessary adaptations and dealing with the leftovers in the light of enlargement.
But there is far more than that at stake.
The Nice Summit will not just address the issue as to whether the Member States are prepared to give up their Commissioner, it will mainly be concerned with their willingness to give shape to the type of European political cooperation that promotes the interests of the European citizen, transcending national interests.
It has frequently come to our notice of late that this political cooperation is totally absent.
A brilliant example is, of course, the nationally motivated measures, and the reaction to the unrest over the high diesel and petrol prices; where concerted action could have given a huge boost to the credibility of European political cooperation in the eyes of the citizens.
Bearing in mind the need to deepen the Union, the Heads of Government must change tack and extend qualified majority voting to a substantial degree.
If we are serious about deepening European cooperation then it is absolutely vital to exercise effective democratic control over the European decision-making process.
That is why qualified majority voting must always go hand in hand with Parliament' s right of codecision.
Eighty per cent of all amendments tabled by Parliament in past months were adopted by the Council.
So we evidently make an enormous contribution in qualitative terms.
As Mrs Berès said, it is of course untenable to draw a distinction and give us codecision rights in consumer affairs on the one hand, but at the same time, only give us consultation rights in agricultural matters.
Let us just think back to the recent BSE-crisis.
Just what are we supposed to tell our citizens?
Mr Méndez de Vigo has just made reference to the Charter, and rightly so.
This is a subject that is, of course, very dear to Parliament' s heart.
It is the embodiment of the citizen' s Europe, this Charter of Fundamental Rights.
But now that this Charter is to be incorporated in the Treaties in Nice, certain governments have evidently given vent to their opposition.
We consider this to be unacceptable, because by incorporating this document into the Treaties of the European Union, fundamental standards and values of the constitutional state and the social welfare state are being embedded in the European structures.
I would warn our Heads of Government against taking an over-minimalist stance in Nice.
As the President of the Commission, Mr Prodi, said, qualified majority voting, together with codecision - Article 62 linking the Charter with the Treaties - is to be the litmus test for our Heads of Government.
We have a saying in the Netherlands that goes: 'if you set the standard too low you will trip over it' .
Our European project must not be allowed to trip up in this way.
Should we falter, this will provoke Parliament' s condemnation.
So we are banking on success, but it is up to you to make it happen.
Mr President, you certainly have to hand it to the United States these days.
They are facing the greatest constitutional crisis they have had in a hundred years and all they keep saying is that their being able to have such a crisis shows how well-designed their system is.
If we could only take a leaf out of their book, i.e. put a little less emphasis on the things that are going wrong in our part of the world, and a little more emphasis on the things that are going well, then we would be a good deal happier than we are now.
I agree with everyone who has said that the Council must be put to the test.
I also have my doubts.
I hope they actually do what Elmar Brok has advised them to do.
If they follow his advice then they will make a success of it.
If they do not, then they will fail.
It is particularly important, to my mind, for social policy and the Charter to be recognised in the Treaty by some means or other.
But why is it that we always think we are doing so much worse than others are, even though there are no objective reasons for this?
I think that to some extent it is down to a certain insecurity on the part of Parliament, and also on the part of the Council and the Commission, when it comes to putting across the message, but on the other hand, it is also a sure fire consequence of the below the belt attacks launched by the so-called 'sceptics' .
They have nothing to offer.
What they offer is a Balkans type scenario, which is the worst thing imaginable.
The Balkans is the sceptics' ideal.
To hear Mr Bonde talk, the Balkans is his ultimate ideal.
We can expect no better of him.
If we then see that these people have absolutely no alternative, would only bring us misery and would bring our industry into a much worse state than it is at present, then far too much notice is being taken of them.
I feel it is also up to the Council to try to act not just for the sake of national interests but also for the sake of the common European interest, because united we stand, divided we fall, and we had better not forget it.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, greater power for the European Union to act in the field of foreign trade and payments is one of the fundamental demands of the European Parliament and of the Commission too, as you, President Prodi, emphatically underlined earlier today.
Although we now see the French Presidency, Mr President of the Council, playing a decisive part here, it is also plainly evident that we are still at square one today, just a few days before the IGC ministerial meeting.
You bear responsibility for the success of this project; you, the President-in-Office of the Council, also have the power to make things happen.
We should include not only trade in goods but also the corresponding trade in services, as well as investments, intellectual property and competition, in the range of matters which are subject to qualified-majority voting in the Council of Ministers and amend Article 133(1) of the Treaty accordingly.
That is our basic demand.
We in the European Union account for 40% of trade in goods and services in the world, compared with the US share of only 20%.
We therefore bear a worldwide burden of responsibility for the establishment of more open markets as well as having the opportunity to export our technological systems and services to many countries of the world.
I have seen at first hand in our Committee on Constitutional Affairs that the great majority of government representatives support the reinforcement of the role played by the European Union and are demanding that.
Apparently, however, it is the French Government which is needlessly stonewalling on this issue.
Let us not forget that France, as a major economic power in the European Union, benefits directly whenever the EU is able to speak with one voice and successfully defend its interests in negotiations with representatives of the world's major trading areas - the United States, Canada and the countries of Asia.
We proceed on the assumption that France will defend with justifiable vigour her own vital interests with regard to her cultural identity, which is also related to the cultural identity of Europe as a whole.
We are urging a compromise, with provision for unanimity where these interests are affected, but I believe there is some way to go before we can start to move forward.
Mr President, the omens have never been good before any Intergovernmental Conference.
Unresolved issues have predominated, and the common ground has been narrow.
Now, very few days before the ministerial meeting of the present Intergovernmental Conference, the signs are once again unpromising.
This time, however, it is paradoxically the prospect of an emerging consensus that is causing us political headaches.
As the days go by, it is becoming ever likelier that the agreement the ministers will reach, while not representing the lowest common denominator, will be a rather low common denominator, indeed a very low common denominator.
Many of us therefore fear that what Nice will offer in the way of institutional reforms will not really enable the Union to implement a major enlargement process involving the accession of twelve or more new Member States, unless further, more extensive reforms are implemented.
I venture to doubt whether consensus will be easier to achieve in the new extended family than it is now.
One can but hope.
Besides, the overall result of the coming IGC ministerial meeting, another small but unfortunately far from delicate detail is causing me some concern.
In the resolution on Nice that we are discussing here, the last clause in point 6 says in essence that Parliament too should have a right of initiative in procedures under Article 7 of the EU Treaty (breaches of the principles of democracy, respect for human rights, etc.).
In general terms, this would impinge upon the central role of the Commission. The fact that the Commission has the sole right of initiative is an essential element of our Union.
Granting the European Parliament a right of initiative in this highly sensitive domain would throw the door wide open to party-political despotism.
Do the European Socialists, who tabled this proposal, intend to react to every election in which the Left loses its majority by initiating a campaign of European ostracism against the new government?
I advise the House to beware of such a move and ask you to vote against this clause tomorrow.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, through the active commitment of Mr Chirac, the French Presidency of the Union has drawn Europe's attention to a series of issues which are of major importance for our future.
This is why the work awaiting the protagonists of the Nice Summit will be challenging and high level, commensurate with the ambitious nature of the projects.
President Prodi, it will not be easy for you, just as it will not be easy for the Heads of State and Government together with whom you will have to find a solution to the many issues under debate, including the vital enlargement, the reform of the institutions and the replacement of outdated mechanisms, and the proclamation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights, which is the first real step towards the European Constitution in which we believe.
With regard to freedoms, individual rights and scientific research, the peoples and their representatives who are present in this and the national parliaments must have the final say.
That, Mr President, is why we are launching an appeal in this House to prevent Brussels and Strasbourg being reduced to forums for national party political issues.
We are here to build the Europe of the future which will completely reform outdated mechanisms and to establish a social market economy which will create employment and generate development.
We cannot do this without the involvement and firm support of the peoples, who must see the European institution as the defender of their rights and the guarantor of their future, not as the seat of the bureaucracy and petty feuds of a limited, primitive political system.
Let us all endeavour to ensure that Nice is not the end of the line but the launching pad for a major project.
In short, we must all aim high, and, in order to do this, we must believe implicitly in what we are doing.
Mr President, we Members of Forza Italia and the European People's Party believe in this project and we will be protagonists alongside you in the construction of a Europe of the citizens.
Mr President, I wish firstly to thank the Members of the European Parliament for a very high standard of debate.
A truly important and truly difficult European Council is coming up, and at such times a kind of tension can be felt generally. Sometimes it can even be discerned in certain newspaper articles and it comes as no surprise to experienced Europeans.
This debate has been of a very high quality, very concise and very useful.
It was also what I really came here to listen to.
I shall take as much account of it as I can.
I definitely intend to pass on the information to the President of the Republic, who will be chairing the Nice European Council, the Prime Minister, and my colleagues on the General Affairs Council next Monday.
So in that respect it has been very useful.
Despite that, although this exercise is also very useful because it raises many relevant questions and suggestions, I have to say that I found the overall tone excessively negative.
I do not think the general tone of the speeches, while they were incredibly varied and rich in detail, genuinely reflects what Europe is really like today.
Europe is in fact making progress, considerable progress.
Of course I hear your concerns and respect them, but they do seem to some extent to be at odds with that considerable progress.
To take the example of the agreement which has just been reached on fiscal harmonisation, and it was unanimous, that is an agreement we have been trying to get for years.
I think it was first mentioned in 1989 actually.
So - as one of you said, referring to American optimism and the way Americans talk about themselves - we should also be capable of valuing what is working well and what is making progress.
As regards method, I honestly do not see what else the country holding the Presidency can do.
Holding it does not give us any extra power or allow us to act in the place of the others.
It brings responsibilities which we shoulder as best we can.
I do not see what method could be adopted to deal with issues as complex as institutional affairs, other than taking the problems one by one, seeing what everyone' s position is, trying to identify what room there is to manoeuvre, asking everyone how flexible they can be, and making proposals which take account of that.
All that can be done, but if the Presidency feels that its approach and ambitions are being blocked, it cannot disregard the positions of the Member States.
That would not be democratic.
Take the Charter - you are fully aware how active the French Presidency has been on that subject.
Well, several Member States were against the very existence of the Charter if it were to have legal force and that had to be recognised.
Some Member States were even against mentioning social affairs or new rights.
So we had to move on, we had to compromise, remembering that Europe' s history is littered with political texts that have had major impact on political ideas, thought and progress, in some cases even when they do not have, or do not yet have, legal force.
This is a perfect example of constructive compromise.
Once we had reached agreement on a text - and this is a good text, very well drafted by the Convention, it reads well, it has style - some countries then said we must incorporate it into Article 6.
As a country we support that view, but what do we do as a Presidency?
We proposed that during the discussions and several countries opposed it, threatening to withdraw their agreement to the very principle of the Charter if we insisted on Article 6.
So it is not at all a case of not proclaiming it, and it is not a problem of transparency.
Everything that is going on is totally transparent. Nothing is being concealed.
Everything is being widely debated.
You know everything about everything, but some countries only agreed to the text of the Charter on condition that it remains purely political.
What can the Presidency do?
The countries making this an absolute condition cannot be excluded from the discussion. The Presidency must be democratic.
You are always talking about democracy, but you have no monopoly on it. There is democracy in the General Affairs Council too, and in the European Council, at all the meetings, in all the debates.
We have to take it into account.
That is not a lack of ambition, in fact it is precisely because we have been very ambitious that we have been faced with strong resistance throughout this whole affair. It shows considerable ambition to tackle institutional reform.
That strong resistance would not exist without strong ambitions.
It is all related.
We are doing our best, if I may say so.
Consequently, I doubt if there is any other way of making progress apart from clarifying the position of each country on each issue and coming to the European Council with the most honest possible presentation of them, after trying to get them to shift of course.
I would also say that I do not think there is a problem between 'larger and 'smaller' countries.
I use those terms for convenience, but I never normally use them.
I do not regard any country that belongs to the European Union as a small country, whatever its size, because its membership means that it too has influence over all the great issues, so the classic distinction is no longer entirely relevant today.
The sense in which the press uses the terms is quite clear.
In the matter of the Intergovernmental Conference, the only issue where people said there was a disagreement between larger and smaller countries lay with the Commission.
That is inaccurate too, because the proposals made were not proposals by the larger countries to penalise the smaller ones.
There was an appeal for everyone to make sacrifices, small, medium-sized and large countries.
That was the starting point for the theory that there was a confrontation between the larger and smaller countries.
That is groundless; that is wrong. It is not true on any of the three other important issues at the IGC and it is not true on any of the other issues at the Nice European Council.
So that picture is inaccurate, and I think the sensible thing is to put it behind us.
As regards what has been said on qualified majority voting, Mr Poettering will forgive me, but I thought it was a little bit facile to name just one country and act as if that country' s shift in its position relating to its own problems was sufficient to bring about a large shift in the others.
That is exactly what we did as regards the Commission.
In developing the idea that it would be advantageous in the future to have a Commission that was not too large to be effective and retained its full capabilities, especially its power of initiative, we demonstrated that we too were ready to make that sacrifice.
Equal rotation affects big countries too, as actually at any given time they might not have a commissioner, just like everyone else.
There is no discrimination.
That shift in position did not spread. It did not prompt sacrifice by others.
The same applies to qualified majority voting issues.
At present twelve of the fifteen countries think there are issues where they cannot move to qualified majority voting, not now.
They accept it in principle, they accept it for the long term, but they have legitimate democratic interests to defend, and in their view the right conditions are not yet in place.
That is the situation the Presidency has to recognise.
There is no link between the positions of the various parties. If one country has an internal problem, that does not make another country' s internal problem disappear.
We have recognised that difficulty, regardless of our ambitions, and as a Presidency we have returned to it many times, at many meetings - we will return to it again at Sunday' s conclave - but I am here to tell you what the situation is.
I cannot tell you exactly what you want to hear.
I have to tell it like it is.
We have done a great deal of work, but we have run up against the same old problem and I do not think a shift in a single country can start the ball rolling, because yet again we are faced with very tough national, political and democratic situations in twelve of the fifteen countries.
Of course, we must try to make progress, because this is not satisfactory.
It is not enough and between now and Nice we will make further efforts to identify what room there is for manoeuvre.
All the same I wanted to make that point.
I do not want to take up too much time.
This has been a very interesting debate, but it has been a long one.
We have another interesting debate ahead of us.
I would simply appeal to you not to make a premature scapegoat of the Presidency-in-Office.
There is no justification for that when the Council has not even taken place yet, and disappointment itself is premature because it is too early to come to any conclusions.
I understand all about the waiting, the impatience, the hopes and ambitions.
I understand all that, I am listening, I am taking account of it and I will try to ensure that we bear it in mind and apply it to the political decisions we face in the course of the difficult negotiations in Nice.
It is not the French Presidency that is going to succeed or fail in Nice.
There is nothing in the Treaties to say that the Presidency-in-Office can annexe the prerogatives and responsibilities of the other Member States, or the Commission, or Parliament, or anyone else.
At Nice it is the Fifteen who must take responsibility. The Fifteen decided to start accession negotiations with twelve countries that want to move forward and want a more effective, stronger Europe at all levels.
It is the Fifteen all together who will or will not find the clear, transparent and democratic answer to today' s problems.
I am sure the Fifteen will find a solution to many of the problems you have raised with the Presidency.
Thank you again and I know we can find the solution together.
I think Parliament will be able to witness the establishment of the improved institutional mechanisms needed to handle the future development of the European Union which unites us all.
Mr President, I would just briefly like to thank the President for presiding over the debate, Mr Védrine for his speech and the Members of Parliament for this high-quality debate.
At this point, I would just like to mention a few specific aspects of the next few days and emphasise the Commission's determination to achieve a high level Summit which will, at last, make it possible for our institutions to function properly once the great process of enlargement that we are undertaking has been accomplished.
I would stress once again that this is one of the few major political decisions that the world is expecting in the near future.
I would further stress that the Commission's determination will target not only the points we have just discussed but also the consideration and the attention that will be given to the Charter of Fundamental Rights.
I am quite aware that it will not become a Constitution overnight, but I also know full well that it will be a constant reference point for us from Nice onwards with regard to the principles according to which the European institutions are to proceed and the principles which the European peoples are to follow to unite in preparation for future cooperation.
This is why it is so important that the Community method is consolidated at Nice, together with the value of the European institutions - the Council, Parliament and the Commission - and their ways of working together.
Here, today, we may be showing too little regard for the fact that we are bound in a single process, that we are not a separate part of a system but a unifying element in the future Europe.
To sum up, Mr Védrine, you mentioned that the situation here appears to be too tense, and you also spoke of a certain pessimism.
Well then, I would like to reply to your appeal with an appeal of my own.
I am well aware that 15 countries will make the decisions at Nice and that the role of the Presidency is not to be a one-man-band, but I have also learned through experience what the role of the Presidency and the responsibility of the French Presidency are.
In recent weeks, we have with great confidence and responsibility presented the French Presidency with a series of major decisions to be taken, aware of the role that France has consistently played in advancing the progress of the European institutions.
Although, as you rightly said, we cannot place all the responsibility upon France, we do know that France must demonstrate its great leadership abilities as a driving force by example.
There are two points, which it is my responsibility to stress unequivocally for they emerged this evening as very heated and very important.
With regard to the reweighting of votes, it is France's responsibility to propose what is to be the fundamental balance between large and small countries, the balance between the population and the strength of each individual country: it is France which must find the way forward in the construction of a Europe which is the Europe of both peoples and nations, and this is what we expect from the Presidency.
But we also expect something else from France. We are quite aware that France is not the only country in the deadlock of incompatibilities and decisions.
There are France, Spain, Germany: all the countries save Belgium and Italy have reasons for being unwilling to change from unanimous voting to qualified majority voting.
However, in my opinion, the Presidency's role is of fundamental importance in this case as well, because I am quite aware that, if France is able to interpret the general interest with regard to the decisions on Article 133, none of the other countries will be able to resist the change.
We are all awaiting this step forward for it is not a step forward just for France but for the whole of Europe.
(Applause)
This Minister, is what we expect from France, inspired precisely by the great confidence which we have in your country and in the leadership ability that we know France can display at difficult times in Europe's progress.
(Applause)
Thank you very much Mr President of the Commission.
To conclude these statements, I have received nine motions for resolutions from eight groups, in accordance with Rule 37, paragraph 2 of the Rules of Procedure..
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow.
As the President, Mrs Fontaine, announced at the beginning of the sitting, we will now proceed to the debate on the procedural motions.
I wish to refer to the disgraceful demonstration that took place in the Foreign Affairs Committee of this Parliament yesterday morning when the Turkish Minister of Foreign Affairs was involved in discussions with us.
A number of members of a Marxist-Leninist group tried to disrupt the meeting and threatened the Chairman.
This was an abuse of this Parliament's proceedings, a gross discourtesy to a distinguished guest and an event that could have had very serious consequences.
Mr President, will you please instruct the Quaestors to identify the culprits, to identify how they obtained access to the Parliament and ensure that they are banned from future access.
Will you also take steps generally to tighten security in appropriate ways so that there could be no recurrence.
It is sometimes difficult to get legitimate visitors and groups into this building but those with malign intentions seem to have no difficulty.
We began this session by expressing our condolences for the latest victim of terrorism in Spain.
It would seem that those responsible for the demonstration in the Foreign Affairs Committee may have connections with a Turkish terrorist group.
I am sure that all in this House will join me in condemning all terrorism whatever its alleged motivation.
In relation to Turkey, we are making many demands of the Turkish Government and people as they embark on the long road to accession to the European Union.
At the same time, we expect that opposition groups in Turkey will resort exclusively to peaceful means.
I shall be placing a declaration to this effect before the House and I trust all Members will give it their support.
Mr President, I would be grateful if you would report back to the House on the points that I have raised.
Mr President, I should like to endorse Mr Van Orden's statement.
Yesterday, two people broke into the meeting of the Foreign Affairs Committee, interrupted the proceedings and threatened our guest, the Turkish Minister for Foreign Affairs, both verbally and physically.
It was a dangerous situation.
As far as I am aware, the two intruders obtained access to the House on the authority of a lady Member of Parliament.
I shall give the President the name of the Member in question and ask her to investigate the matter and to take appropriate measures with a view to preventing such disruptive and aggressive individuals from entering the House. The shocking thing is that this incident took place with the aid of a Member of this House.
I find it absolutely scandalous that Members of Parliament can stoop to such methods.
I should like to put a second point to the Bureau.
In our present situation, we shall continue to have problems with the safety of our guests.
I believe that we must take action, which we certainly have not done to any extent hitherto, in order to ensure that the guests of Parliament can feel like guests in this House and that they need have no fear of being subjected to threatening behaviour.
To that end, we must put the requisite organisational and security structure in place, which also means our guests being directly protected by people who are trained for that purpose, because we naturally cannot employ foreign security staff to escort our guests.
I believe we face a new challenge here, to which I ask the Bureau to respond.
Mr President, on behalf of my group, I should like to express our wholehearted support for the Chairman of the Committee.
It is not a matter of curbing the right to demonstrate - absolutely not - nor do we intend to make the House into a high-security wing; it is a matter of establishing an essential minimum level of security.
We shall not have any more foreign guests at our committee meetings if we cannot offer them the minimum security cover that will guarantee their safety.
We had both the President of a nation and the Foreign Minister of Turkey at our committee meeting when this incident occurred.
Please take this very seriously, so that we can continue to receive guests in future and so that we can treat them as guests ought to be treated.
Mr President, I was not aware of this incident.
I am totally opposed to anyone at all threatening an invited Minister, even a Turkish one.
Since we are talking about Turkey, however, I should like to point out that a Member of Parliament from my group, Mrs Uca, was representing my group until yesterday at the congress of one of Turkey' s Kurdish parties, HADEP.
She was unfortunate enough to utter a few words in the Kurdish language before coming to her national tongue, which is German.
The Turkish police force immediately prevented her from speaking not just in Kurdish, which in any case she had ceased to do, but even in German, and there had to be negotiations before she was able to pass on a message of greetings from my group in German.
Virtually the same day, a leader from the Cypriot Parliament, who has, moreover, already visited the European Parliament, Mr Christou, was refused a Turkish visa even though he was travelling, if you can believe it, to a tripartite meeting in Istanbul between Turks, Greeks and Cypriots, in a totally peaceable context.
I therefore urge you, Mr President, to please ask Mrs Fontaine, as President of Parliament, to send a letter to the Turkish authorities, certainly in order to apologise for this shabby treatment of one of their representatives but also to remind them that Members of the European Parliament or indeed members of the candidate countries travelling to their country should not be treated in this way.
Hospitality over here and hospitality and respect over there.
I would like to associate my group with this complaint about this very serious and indeed frightening incident.
I would say to Mr Wurtz that it is a part of the process of trying to open up the prospect of European integration for Turkey that we show them the sanctity and power of parliamentary democracy.
If we cherish it inside this place, we should certainly be prepared to welcome and secure our guests in a very much more credible fashion than we showed ourselves able to do yesterday.
If we are not proud of our Parliament, we cannot expect the Turks to copy us.
Mr President, I should like to draw both your and the House's attention to the incident which Mr Wurtz referred to, i.e. the fact that the Turkish Government refused a visa to the Cypriot member of parliament and parliamentary representative of AKEL, Andreas Christou, who was due to attend a meeting of Turkish, Greek and Cypriot parties in Istanbul.
Andreas Christou, I may add, is the deputy chairman of the Cypriot parliament's delegation to the EU-Cyprus joint parliamentary committee.
I would like, on behalf of the Communist Party of Greece, to express our outrage and horror at the latest act of provocation on the part of Turkey, a candidate country for membership of the European Union, and to join in the call for a protest to be made in the name of the European Parliament.
I can inform you that Mrs Fontaine - this has just been communicated to me and I should like to echo the sentiment on behalf of the Bureau - deeply deplores this grave incident.
It goes without saying that we in this house of European democracy must guarantee the safety of all our guests and anyone who spends time within these four walls.
Naturally, freedom of expression must be respected too.
Our President, Mrs Fontaine, has now asked the Secretary General for a report.
This report will, of course, be considered as quickly as possible.
Based on the findings of this report, the President will not hesitate to take the required measures and also to involve the organs of this Parliament that need to be involved, such as the quaestors or the Bureau, for example.
Mr President, a few days ago, in Bari, the capital of the region of Puglia, which is one of the most important regions of Italy, the President of the Regional Council, Mr Raffaele Fitto, who was a Member of this Parliament until June last year, was attacked and beaten up.
This is evidence of the way verbal violence leads to physical violence.
I feel that, in addition to expressing sympathy towards a leading figure, an important Italian political leader who has also been a Member of this House, Parliament must firmly condemn such incidents and show its solidarity with the victims.
Thank you for your contribution, Mr Tajani.
We will duly take note of what you have said.
Mr President, I am just taking the floor to inform you that a delegation of workers from Telecom Italia is present in Parliament today.
Telecom Italia is a leading company in the telecommunications sector.
These workers have come to Parliament to present a petition bearing over 10 000 signatures, calling precisely for the support of the European institutions.
This is because they have been made redundant by their company despite the fact that it is economically sound and that it has been expanding for some years.
Telecom Italia is therefore a company which raises its prices and cuts jobs.
In recent weeks, in recent days, we have been discussing the Charter of Fundamental Rights and the rights of workers.
It would therefore be appropriate for Parliament to endeavour to avoid there being such a huge discrepancy between its fine declarations of principles and harsh reality.
Therefore, what we want from Parliament and the Commission are greater endeavours to protect workers and fight unemployment.
Mr President, there was an extremely serious occurrence in Italy yesterday.
On the grounds that pills do no harm and that "Marijuana is a treatment for tumours", the Minister for Health undermined the dignity of the individual by calling for the drug to be legalised.
All this has happened while we are preparing for Nice with a Charter of Fundamental Rights, the preamble to which affirms that the European Union is founded on the indivisible, universal principle of human dignity.
The incident also coincides with a Community action programme on the prevention of drug addiction which, precisely because it is a preventive action, identifies the drug as a phenomenon which should certainly be avoided and, I feel, should not be supported.
Pino Arlacchi, Under Secretary-General of the United Nations and Executive Director of the UN Office for Drug Control and Crime Prevention, condemned the Italian Minister for Health's speech, for the Minister was clearly ignorant of the good news on prevention recorded in the United States, Spain and even Bolivia and Peru, and Mr Arlacchi called upon the Italian government ...
(The President cut the speaker off)
At the beginning of today's sitting, Madame President paid homage to the memory of Ernest Lluch.
In 1966, Ernest Lluch, his brother and myself, with more than 60 other members of the teaching staff were expelled by the Francoist regime from the University of Barcelona.
From that time on, in spite of our different political opinions, I recognised the sincere commitment of Ernest Lluch in the struggle for dialogue and understanding, even facing the authoritarian position of the present government.
The best homage to Ernest Lluch and to his memory would be to respect his message - dìaleg in Catalan - can we all give this a chance in the Basque country?
Thank you very much, Mr Gorostiaga.
Would you please sit down and remove that sign.
Mr President, I would like to draw the President' s attention to a letter that we sent in connection with the Statute for Members of Parliament.
In this letter, Mrs Hautala made mention of our support and sympathy for the efforts undertaken by the President, Mrs Fontaine, to set up negotiations on our own Statute as MEPs.
It is therefore a matter of the deepest regret to us that a meeting that was planned for 30 November was cancelled.
We urge you in the strongest terms to call another meeting before the end of the French Presidency, so that the discussion about the Statute can be brought to a successful conclusion.
Thank you very much, Mrs Maes.
I will communicate this to Mrs Fontaine, who will take the necessary steps.
Mr President, last year the Council took an excellent initiative to create the first European Union forum on human rights.
This excellent initiative was repeated this year and the second forum will be held on 12 and 13 December in Paris, which is to say at the same time as the European Parliament' s part-session in Strasbourg.
This is, at the very least, poor manners with regard to the European Parliament, if not an outright snub, and, allowing for the possibility that the Members of the European Parliament have nothing to say about human rights, even though they have voted, by a very large majority, in favour of the Charter of Fundamental Rights, they will be absent from this European Union forum which many of them attended last year in order to debate with NGOs and institutions.
I would therefore urge that, in response, our official representatives are not sent to this forum, and that, next year, a date should be agreed when Members of Parliament may attend, which means the dates of the Strasbourg sittings should be avoided when scheduling this important meeting.
You are right, Mr Cornille.
This must be arranged differently in the future where possible.
Mr President, when Mr Gorostiaga uses the word "dialogue" in his tribute to the murdered Ernest Lluch, he is insulting his memory and insulting the ideas for which ETA murdered him.
Mr Gorostiaga, I have profound contempt for the terrorists of ETA, but the people who use this democratic Parliament in a cowardly fashion to justify the murders they commit deserve the same contempt.
Mr Gorostiaga, you are a disgrace to this Parliament.
Ladies and gentlemen, we are not going to debate a single issue here.
On the other hand of course, everyone can have their say.
Mr President, I do not want to get involved in controversy, but I feel that I really must mention the fact that, on a day when we have kept a minute' s silence to mark another murder by ETA, there is somebody in this House who wishes to defend dialogue with the very people who murdered Mr Lluch.
I think it is disgraceful - as Mrs Díez has said - that the memory of Ernest Lluch should be used in this way.
I think that this House now knows perfectly well what it can expect from Mr Gorostiaga, from the group he represents and from his terrorist friends.
However, I would like to ask Mr Gorostiaga whether he still has a sufficient trace of personal dignity, of dignity as a man, for us to ask him to respect human life.
I want to answer the awful action of both colleagues in this Parliament who presented ideas opposite to those of Ernest Lluch.
He was always fighting for dialogue, he desired dialogue.
I would say only that every action of ETA prompts ...
Mr Gorostiaga, I am going to interrupt you there.
We have now said enough on that score.
Common foreign and security policy - Afghanistan
Mr President, Mr President of the Council - whom I address today in your capacity as President of the Council of Defence Ministers - Commissioner, I believe that the development of our foreign, security and defence policy has generally been extremely encouraging over the past year.
Since we are always taking the Commission and the Council to task here, let me say from the outset that I should like to congratulate them today, because the manner in which this week's decisions have gradually implemented the Cologne and Helsinki declarations is the result of some excellent work, for which I wish to compliment all participants.
Following our painful experiences in the former Yugoslavia, experiences which showed that peacekeeping and civilian crisis management are ineffectual if they are not accompanied by a clear message that they can be enforced by military means if the need arises, the Governments of the fifteen Member States, the Council and the Commission learned their lessons and have now made considerable progress.
I hope that the implementation of these decisions will not remain a mere paper exercise but that it will also be reflected in the appropriations in national budgets, which is where the executive power lies in this case.
There is no use in having a hundred thousand troops if they are all lame and blind.
Our troops are rendered lame by the fact that the European Union and its Member States do not possess the necessary transport capacities.
They will be blind for as long as we do not have the essential intelligence facilities, such as satellite systems, which would make it possible to deploy these troops as wisely and effectively as circumstances dictate.
At the same time, we also agree that the sequence of responses is correct.
The use of military force is the last resort. Our main task is to ensure, by means of a judicious policy of prevention and astute civilian crisis management, that it is never necessary to use military force.
To this end, I believe that we must also initiate close cooperation between the institutions of the European Union and the Member States.
The Community is largely responsible today for civilian crisis management and prevention as well as for all the associated instruments.
The European Union has four times as much money in its budget for foreign aid as the United States.
Many important aspects of trade policy lie within the purview of the Commission.
I believe that, if this interaction between the civilian and military authorities is to work, we must ensure that there is no institutionalised duplication of effort or duality of purpose but that the civilian and military efforts are yoked together.
In point of fact, before Amsterdam both the European Parliament and the Commission took the view that it would be best to have a Vice-President of the Commission with responsibility for foreign policy who would also assume the role of the High Representative and would have a special obligation to and link with the Council.
This did not prove to be politically acceptable, which is why we now have two figures, both of whom perform sterling work in their own way.
The problems do not lie with them, but rather in the institutional ramifications, and we must try to keep such problems to an absolute minimum.
This view, moreover, also relates to the European Parliament.
The European Parliament very much wants to be involved in the formulation and pursuit of this policy, as the Treaties prescribe - and perhaps the Treaty of Nice will improve the relevant provisions - and as is laid down in the interinstitutional agreement between the Council, the Commission and Parliament on the budgetary responsibilities of the European Parliament in matters of foreign and security policy.
To be precise, civilian crisis management also lies within the budgetary responsibility of the European Parliament and, naturally, of the Council too, whereas defence policy remains a budgetary responsibility of the national parliaments, because the armed forces are not yet European forces but are still subject to their national governments and parliaments.
Mobilisation orders are also a national responsibility, because each country takes a sovereign decision as to whether or not it will participate in a joint operation.
Now that this division of responsibilities is crystal clear, we must ensure that we create a negotiating level between the European Parliament and the national parliaments, so that we as parliamentarians, through exchanges of information at various levels, are able to monitor the national executives in an appropriate way.
Decision making on foreign, security and defence policies is the task of the executive branch.
We decide on the money and check whether it is being spent wisely and whether prudent policies are being pursued.
I believe that a sound strategy will be developed on this basis.
Talks are already taking place between the European Parliament and the national parliaments on this subject with a view to ensuring that the system develops in a rational manner.
When I speak of organisation, I also mean that the European Union, which makes such strenuous efforts in this field, should be given a corresponding degree of responsibility.
I can see that things are not working sufficiently well in Kosovo, for example, and that we shall soon need a coordinator for the coordinators, because so many institutions are involved - not the European institutions but many others - and we must get that under control.
I only included this as one small aspect of my report; it is covered by Mrs Lalumière's report, which focuses far more sharply on this point.
But we know that, in many parts of the world, such as the Middle East or Southern Asia, where the Kashmir conflict is a potential tinderbox, the international community is waiting for the European Union to be able to engage in mediation, so that there will be more shoulders to share the burden of responsibility in this domain.
For this reason, we bear a high degree of responsibility for safeguarding peace, both here in Europe and in the world at large.
I hope that this new mechanism will gradually enhance our ability to meet that responsibility.
In this context, Mr President of the Council, I also believe that in Afghanistan in particular, a country we ought to speak about here, we should play our part in ensuring that firstly a stop can, at long last, be put to the trail of murder which has plagued that country for decades and which a barbarous regime is now pursuing against its own people and secondly in ensuring that the people in Afghanistan are able to live in a rational, peaceful and socially just world.
We should try to make our contribution there too.
Mr President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, Minister, Commissioner, in dealing with European Security and Defence Policy this afternoon, we are, as President Brok just said, in a field where we can be optimistic about the construction of Europe.
Since the Cologne European Council, at Helsinki and Feira and tomorrow, I hope, at the Nice Council, we have been able to follow the progress of this new policy with pleasure.
Things do not often turn out that way, Minister, and we are delighted.
On 15 June before the Feira Summit, the European Parliament passed a resolution, and tomorrow, on the eve of the Nice Council, it has to vote on a text summarising its position.
Obviously I hope a clear majority will support the motion for a resolution.
I already know the vote will not be unanimous and that is not surprising, because this is difficult ground where differing political options are expressed on the role of the European Union as opposed to that of its Member States, on the place of the soldier as opposed to the civilian, on the place of the European Union as opposed to NATO and the United States, on the role of the European Union in the world and the choice it has to make between pacifism and non-intervention, on the one hand, and the will to deal with crises, on the other.
These choices sometimes divide us, but now gradually a majority is taking shape.
Barring accidents, that majority should support the line taken for a year and a half by the Council of Ministers, the High Representative, Mr Solana, and the Commission, especially in Commissioner Patten' s area of responsibility, in charge of civilian crisis management resources, but associated with that support, which I hope is clear and lucid, there are many questions, sometimes warnings, and I shall consider some of them here.
First, a brief comment on a crucial issue: the relationship between the new European policy and NATO.
We have discussed this at length in the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy.
The proposed text confirms the decisions of the European Council.
This is not about competing with NATO or usurping its responsibility for defending our territory, it is about turning Europe into a credible partner of the United States by establishing a new balance in the Alliance and giving the European Union a margin of autonomy in the event of a crisis.
Secondly, you will note that the resolution affirms Parliament' s clear intention to place the security and defence policy squarely on two complementary pillars: civilian crisis management and, should that fail, military crisis management.
This concern for balance means Parliament will be monitoring the fair division of financial resources carefully, although we are well aware that the first comes under the Community budget and the second is still covered by national budgets.
Thirdly, we are glad to see the CESDP starting off with a tangible achievement, the Rapid Reaction Force.
And we are pleased with the work done so far, especially at the recent Capabilities Commitment Conference.
All that has the merit of making this policy credible.
This is also the time to take an inventory of the state of our armies and consolidate the will for reform, which I noted recently in Berlin as regards the German army.
On the institutional reforms you have undertaken, I would like to stress that we want the European Union to have a coherent, clear and effective chain of command.
It is not enough to create bodies like the PSC, the Military Committee and the Military Staff; the vertical and horizontal links between the various bodies must also function properly and in real time.
We do not feel entirely reassured on this point and in particular we would like to have the crisis powers of the Commission, the Council and the High Representative specified precisely.
Briefly, Mr President, I would like to mention a major problem for the credibility of this policy - budgetary resources.
Of course, savings must be made, but we cannot exclude the need for new resources if we want to fill the gaps found in the inventory, especially in high-tech areas.
Mr President, like Mr Brok, I would like to stress the role of the European Parliament and the parliamentary institutions.
There is so much more to say, but I want the Council' s representatives to know that the European Parliament is keen to adopt this unfamiliar culture of security and defence, and we hope the Nice Summit is a great success.
In discussing Madame Lalumière's comprehensive and interesting report on the common European security and defence policy in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs, we concentrated on the institutions and decision-making procedures. In particular the need for parliamentary scrutiny and democratic accountability.
The development of the ESDP is a major new departure for the European project and therefore needs to have the existing institutional framework clarified.
Whether there are legal arguments that existing powers are adequate is not really the issue.
It should be clear that the parliamentary dimension should be introduced.
No member of a national parliament would consider for a moment having limited and anything but transparent democratic scrutiny of security and defence.
Within the limits of operational security even the US Senate and House are closely involved with the operations of the Department of Defence.
Because of the particular nature of the possible developments of the CESDP, we also believe that Treaty changes will be needed so that such developments can be conducted openly and democratically.
Similarly the status of the High Representative must be clarified in relation to the existing triangle and the Commissioner responsible for external relations.
Mr President, you will be aware perhaps that my Party in the UK have considerable reservations about the thrust of this policy but I would like to take this opportunity to thank my colleagues on the Constitutional Affairs Committee for guiding me into producing an opinion that I hope will be acceptable to this distinguished House.
. (FR) Mr President, given our late start and my commitments afterwards, I shall try to make the speech that I had prepared a little shorter.
It was to be quite long, but I shall endeavour not to omit anything crucial.
Ladies and gentlemen, the publication of the reports by Mrs Lalumière and Mr Brok gives me the opportunity to present you with a preliminary assessment of the major developments that have taken place over the last few months in these areas.
First of all, in the field of foreign and security policy, I shall assess the main institutional developments and more specifically issues relating to the European defence system and Mr Alain Richard, Minister for Defence, will speak in greater detail about all the aspects to do with military capabilities.
I shall then give a summary of the main results of the CFSP over the last six months.
I shall also answer, or I shall try to answer, Mr Brok' s oral question on Afghanistan.
First of all, enhancing the common foreign and security policy.
As Mr Brok pointed out a moment ago, the European Union has asserted its position over the last year and this has been backed up by developments that will prove to be extremely important for the future.
I feel that the best example of this is the very rapid development of a European defence system.
Following the German, Finnish and Portuguese Presidencies, the French Presidency has sought to fulfil the mandate given to it at Feira.
Nice will, I think, mark a major stage and achievement in this field, in large part through the creation of permanent structures for a European defence system which should enable the European Union, in the course of 2001, to declare itself operationally capable of managing a crisis.
The issue of military capabilities will be dealt with by Mr Richard, in a moment.
The institutional aspects are also extremely important, because they will allow the Union to make plans, to take decisions and to act; in other words, to take political control and maintain strategic leadership of a crisis management operation.
At Nice, the European Council is due to adopt several decisions, which I shall now discuss.
First of all, the creation of permanent political and military structures, a political and security committee, a military committee and a European Union defence staff.
The mechanism created as a result of these decisions will be complemented by establishing procedures for crisis management and the establishment of an operations centre in the Secretariat-General.
As was laid down at Feira, these new structures will be put in place as soon as possible following the Nice Council.
The next issue is ongoing arrangements with third countries and NATO.
You all know how important these agreements are and we therefore need to establish relationships of trust and cooperation with NATO, with the candidate countries and with allied countries, whilst fully respecting the autonomy of the European Union.
These relationships will, in particular, take the form of meetings between the North Atlantic Council and the iPSC and of meetings between the European Union and the fifteen European candidate and/or ally countries.
We have also worked on enhancing civilian crisis management capabilities, in order especially to enable the European Union to achieve the objective that it has set for itself in the field of policing.
I would also like to mention, in response to the comments made by Mrs Lalumière in her report on the need to improve our research into conflict prevention, that recommendations have been drawn up by the High Representative and by the Commission on improving the coherence and effectiveness of action in this field, and I know that the Swedish Presidency will continue to work towards this goal.
I also noted, in Mr Brok' s report, a number of questions and remarks on increasing the effectiveness of the European Union' s external action.
This is one of the dossiers into which I personally put in a great deal of work.
I hoped that we would make progress in this field, because the situation was clearly unsatisfactory.
That was also the reason why, at the informal meeting of Ministers of Foreign Affairs at Evian at the beginning of September, I put this issue on the agenda and why we devoted a whole sitting to it, on the basis of Commissioner Patten' s proposals and plans.
We have made considerable progress since then.
On 9 October, the General Affairs Council adopted conclusions on increasing coordination and improving management and the instruments necessary for decision-making.
The Council decided to hold an annual debate on these issues and the first such debate will take place after the January or February session.
We will then assess the issue of when these new measures are to be first implemented.
I would emphasise that this whole process has been carried out with full cooperation and perfect agreement between the Council in general, the High Representative, the Commission, and particularly, Commissioner Patten.
As Mr Brok hopes in his report, the Council will have files summarising all of the relationships between the Union and each partner country, in order to gain greater benefit from the Union' s overall effort, to increase its efficiency and to provide better preparation for its discussions on external action.
For the first debate, at the beginning of next year, the Commission will draw up a scoreboard, country by country, for the past budgetary year, which will show the current state of commitments, payments, and outstanding amounts for the main programmes funded by the Community budget and by the EDF.
In this work, therefore, we have been very aware of the need for the Commission and the Member States to achieve greater complementarity in their aid actions for third countries whilst preserving, of course, the specific competences of the Commission.
This applies to the actions of the traditional Member State administrations as well as to the specialist agencies.
I now wish to say a few words about the new instruments established by the Treaty of Amsterdam and about interinstitutional relations, which are both subjects on which, I noted, your reports expressed some concern.
Three common strategies have been adopted since May 1999, on Russia, on Ukraine and on the Mediterranean region.
The Presidency has now asked the Secretary-General - the High Representative - to draw up a preliminary assessment report on how these common strategies are functioning and on their optimal use.
This report is due to be presented at the debate at the beginning of next year that I mentioned.
I should like briefly to talk about interinstitutional relations.
I am aware of the discussion to which Mr Brok alluded just now, according to which the duties of the High Representative ought to have been allocated to a Vice-President of the Commission.
But, as you yourself make the point, Mr Brok, since taking office and in the spirit that the various presidencies have sought to maintain, Mr Solana' s way of working has been fully compliant with the rules and procedures laid down by the Treaty.
There has been coordination, no major difficulties have arisen and, to put it in plain terms, things are going well.
We have shown on several major problems that we have faced in this period that we have achieved close and constructive cooperation between all the institutions.
If we take the events in the Balkans as an example, it can be said that everyone played their role to the full.
We are definitely seeing a real policy in this region of south-eastern Europe, which is furthermore beginning to bear fruit.
I come now to a quick preliminary and, of course, still provisional assessment of the actions undertaken under the French Presidency in order to ensure a higher profile for the European Union in the international arena.
I shall therefore quickly look at a few regions and a few events.
I shall continue with the Balkans, since I was speaking about that region a moment ago.
The situation there has altered radically with the change of power in Belgrade, even if, of course, much remains to be done.
We had a genuine European strategy, which consisted of sending at the right time, in other words before the elections, a message to the Serbian people which had been drafted at Evian, announcing that if democracy won the day, European policy would be radically revised.
Democracy did win the day, after all the ups and downs, with which we are all familiar.
We have therefore kept our promise and the leaders of today' s Yugoslavia tell us that the message from the European Union played a genuine role in that affair at that time.
We are therefore part of that course of events, which was entirely logical.
We have undertaken to re-establish relations in all areas with Yugoslavia.
This does not mean that we consider all the problems to have been solved.
We are fully aware that with regard to Kosovo and Montenegro, with regard to Yugoslavia' s relations with its neighbouring countries and to its obligations to the International Court of Justice, much remains to be done or resolved.
What it does mean, however, is that the European Union did consider it to be crucial to commit fully itself to supporting this movement towards democracy until it has completely achieved its objectives, until it is consolidated and can then wholeheartedly commit itself to redefining a new policy for Yugoslavia, particularly with regard to its neighbours.
This is the context that explains why the summit held recently in Zagreb was so important.
It had been devised against a different backdrop, in order to send a message to the Serbian people, bypassing their then leaders.
The changes that have taken place enabled us to make the Zagreb Summit a first real democratic meeting of the whole European Union and all the representatives of the Western Balkan countries.
We also applied ourselves to the issue of regional cooperation, an idea that met with a degree of resistance from the countries in the region that do not wish to be locked into a past from which they have broken free, and I think I can say that, as a result of this summit, they understood that there was no contradiction between regional cooperation and their progress and rapprochement in relation to the European Union, largely through the stabilisation and association process which was confirmed and laid down on that occasion.
This summit, which was an initiative by the French Presidency, also enabled us to restate our commitment to that region, as, shortly before the summit, we had taken the necessary decisions on the major programmes for both the Mediterranean and the Balkan regions.
The summit also gave us the opportunity to confirm that the new Balkans programme, which is known as "CARDS" , has been allocated EUR 4.15 billion for the 2000-2006 period.
Much then remains to be done, both in terms of consolidating democracy and in terms of regional cooperation, but we now have a framework and a sense of direction and I think that the European Union now knows where it is going in this area.
In parallel and at the same time, the European Union has continued to develop relations with major strategic partners such as Russia.
Consequently, an EU-Russia Summit was held on 30 October, under the partnership and cooperation agreement.
Our policy is quite clear: we want, on the basis of principles of democracy, human rights, the rule of law and the market economy, to provide the most useful incentives and support for the huge changes undertaken by Russia, for it to become, eventually - and it will take as long as necessary - a great country, which is developing, which is modernising at every level and which is peace-loving, in short, the kind of country that we would be happy to have as our neighbour.
All instruments for cooperation with Russia, both Community and national, must be directed towards this.
An EU-Ukraine Summit also took place, on 15 September, and the fruitful political dialogue that resulted is now being extended to issues of conventional arms exports, security and disarmament, a subject highlighted by the OSCE as being a problem where Ukraine is concerned.
It is therefore desirable that this country should be included in this dialogue.
I wish to say to Mr Brok, who expressed concern at this, that the issue of more tangible cooperation with Ukraine, under the CFSP for example, will be addressed in the report to be presented at Nice on the arrangements that will enable our partners to contribute to military crisis management led by the European Union.
Moreover, Ukraine is making a special effort with regard to this issue as, since 1 July, it has acted on 15 declarations made by the presidency on behalf of the European Union.
We have also been maintaining transatlantic dialogue on the Balkans, in which the whole policy implemented by the European Union has been the subject of constant information passing in both directions between the United States and Europe.
We have also maintained dialogue on Russia and on the Middle East peace process, even if my comments apply more to the period preceding the tragic events that have taken place since the end of September than to the most recent events.
During this period we have also kept the United States fully informed of developments in European security and defence policy, which is essential if this policy is to develop harmoniously, as is the case at the moment.
Dialogue under this presidency has not yet finished as a summit is scheduled to take place in Washington on 18 December and in Ottawa the following day.
We encountered a problem with the Euro-Mediterranean Conference in Marseilles, as many of our Arab partners found it difficult to take part in the meeting in the current climate.
Nevertheless, we did hold the meeting and they did eventually take part, with two exceptions.
I think that the way in which the work was carried out and the intensity of the debates that were held on this very sensitive issue justified holding the meeting.
What was at stake, and this was the reason for insisting on holding the meeting, was the continuation of the Barcelona process, which remains so important, even though it has suffered as a result of the situation in the Middle East. Nevertheless, it remains a powerful concept for the future, a long-term strategic idea that we must not allow to be undermined by the current tragedies, however heartrending they may be.
The meeting did, therefore, take place and at this meeting we announced the budgetary appropriations for MEDA II for the period 2000-2006, which come to EUR 5.35 billion.
To this figure we can add the loans that the EIB has planned to set aside, making a total of around EUR 13 billion.
This demonstrates the substantial reality of the European Union' s commitment to this region.
With regard to the Middle East, the Presidency remains in constant contact with all the key players, even through the most difficult times.
We managed to ensure, for the first time, that Javier Solana was allowed to participate in the Sharm El-Sheikh Summit, held on 17 October.
We spoke on behalf of the Fifteen in Marseilles, though this was not the main purpose of the Marseilles meeting, which was to save the framework of Euro-Mediterranean cooperation.
On 20 November, the European Union once again expressed its views on the situation in the Middle East, in harsher terms which the deteriorating situation on the ground called for.
We remain fully committed and we can achieve a number of things in the coming days and weeks.
The most urgent issue remains the one you are concerned about, which is first and foremost an end to the violence and for both sides to be able to resume discussions on the basic issues directly.
Moreover, Javier Solana is a member of the fact-finding committee that is meeting in New York on Sunday, which we hope will set to work very quickly.
I plan to go there myself, on behalf of the presidency, after Nice, in connection with the work to be undertaken by this fact-finding committee.
The French Presidency has striven to develop relations between the Union and the other great regional blocs and has held many meetings with Asian countries. There has been the third ASEM Summit, the summit with Japan and the one with China.
Previously, a summit was held with India, under the Portuguese Presidency, and a ministerial meeting will be taking place with ASEAN.
We encountered a small problem with the issue of North Korea, but I wish to state here that we must make a distinction between the issue of establishing diplomatic relations, which may have appeared rather confused at times, but which is not the real underlying issue, since some countries have maintained relations for a long time while others have not.
We decided to work on the content of our policy towards North Korea and, on 20 November, we adopted guidelines for that country and the European troika has been able to visit North Korea on the basis of this approach.
Our dialogue with Africa has been very active at all levels, at ministerial level too, particularly with CDAO, but also with SADC. This is moreover the case at this very moment.
Dialogue with Latin America has continued both in New York, on the sidelines of the UN General Assembly, and on more specific points, such as the support provided by the European Union for the peace process initiated by President Pastrana of Columbia, and for his social, economic and institutional programmes.
I would not want to conclude this summary without mentioning the Union' s action on what are today known as the great global or cross-sectoral dossiers, particularly in the field of human rights, where work is still necessary to improve the coherence of European policy in international bodies and to involve civil society more closely.
We have continued with the effort that was started previously.
The second edition of the European Union' s annual report on human rights has been presented to the European Parliament and a human rights forum will be held in Paris on 13 December.
Furthermore, the French Presidency has continued with the policy of promoting and upgrading disarmament and non-proliferation treaties and has played an active role in the conference on the illegal trade in light and small-calibre weapons to be held in 2001.
The Presidency has also drafted the second annual report on the implementation of the European code of conduct on arms exports, which has led to real progress and is due to be adopted by the General Affairs Council on 4 December.
As you see - and I have simplified this presentation considerably - European Union activity in these fields is developing apace and all of our partners throughout the world attach a great deal of importance to this fact.
I shall finish with a few words to the effect that the Council shares the concerns expressed by Mr Brok about Afghanistan.
I would remind you that the Union is implementing measures on the basis of a common position of January 2000, which are as follows: a complete ban on arms supplies, pressure to be exerted on all sides, support for the attempts by the international community and individuals within Afghanistan to provide mediation, the fight against drugs and aid for the civil population.
The Commission would certainly have something to say about these matters if we had the time, but to put it simply, all the efforts that we are actively making, because it truly is a long-suffering country, will never be effective unless all of the neighbouring countries, or the countries that are involved in some way or another and have some influence in Afghanistan, decide once and for all to stop intervening and interfering.
Since this has yet to happen, the Taliban regime remains immune to the arguments and pressure applied from abroad.
I wish I could say that our pressure and our action are having some effect on the current situation, but unfortunately the Afghan situation appears to remain somehow self-sufficient and resistant to all such action.
This is not, however, going to put us off.
We must continue with these actions and I know that many Members of this Parliament here today are very aware of this.
We shall therefore continue our work in this area.
This is a specific point, Mr President but a specific question was asked, and so I wished to provide this type of answer.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, as I speak to you today, I am aware of taking part in a key turning point in the life of Europe, because this is, I think, the first time that a Minister of Defence has addressed your Parliament.
On 24 October, I reviewed the progress of a European defence system with your Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights and Common Security and Defence Policy.
I am delighted to continue in this vein by talking to you today about the results of our conference on military commitments of 20 November.
I wish, first of all, to express my agreement with the wording of your resolution of 21 November on the European security and defence policy.
You claim that this policy does not aim to compete with the North Atlantic Alliance, which remains today the foundation of the collective defence of its members, or to establish a permanent European army.
The Presidency and, I believe, all our governments share this view.
Our aim is to gain the capability, by 2003, of coordinating our armies to fulfil the Petersberg tasks, should the Council decide to launch a military operation on behalf of the Union.
In the vital area of military capability, at Helsinki, our States set themselves the overall target of being in a position, by 2003, to deploy within 60 days and to sustain for at least one year, forces of up to the size of an army corps, in other words, 60 000 soldiers.
These forces should be self-sufficient in military terms and should have the necessary capabilities for command, control, intelligence, and for other support units, as well as air and naval backup.
Our Member States also decided, again at the Helsinki Council, a year ago, to rapidly establish collective targets for strategic capabilities.
The Fifteen have successfully achieved the difficult task of making these objectives a reality in military and technical terms.
I wish to emphasise the quality of the completely new work that has been carried out by our States' military experts, under the auspices of the interim military body, which was only created in March.
I would also like to highlight the genuineness and effectiveness of the cooperation with the North Atlantic Alliance, which enabled us to have a fruitful exchange on the development of these new capabilities.
As a result, we now have detailed military planning documents, which have just been adopted by the General Affairs Council.
Firstly, we have the catalogue of capabilities, a 300-page document which scrupulously lists all the military capabilities that are known to be needed by our Union in order to guarantee that all of the Petersberg tasks can be fulfilled.
I would remind you of the wide range of tasks that this covers: humanitarian aid, the evacuation of nationals, conflict prevention and also the separation by force of the warring parties.
We now have this catalogue of capabilities, which has been adopted by the whole Union.
We also now have a catalogue of forces that records the voluntary contributions of each Member State.
These contributions, which were confirmed by the Fifteen at the conference on 20 November, form a pool of more than 100 000 men, around 400 combat aircraft and 100 naval vessels.
These contributions therefore enable us, in terms of quantity, to fully meet the overall target set by the Council.
I would like to make two specific points relating to these numbers.
I could, of course, add many other facts and figures, but I would like to be concise.
These numbers relate to a mechanism that is designed to be maintained for a European Union operation for at least one year, which means that each country will have, in line with the contribution that it has stated, a reserve force that will enable it to provide the necessary relief forces.
Furthermore, although I mentioned the figure of 100 000 soldiers, this does not mean that we are seeking to exceed the target set in Helsinki, but that we will have a reserve of qualified forces and forces with various areas of expertise, which will enable us to guarantee that the figure of 60 000 personnel in the Council' s target would be reached whatever operational conditions they may be required to work in.
I wish, briefly, to comment on these figures in order to emphasise that if the European Union has taken the decision to provide itself with military capabilities, it cannot carry out this decision on an unrealistic basis.
These capabilities must be sound and credible, because, as everyone here can imagine, and as I can attest from personal experience, when a democratic political authority faced with a situation of violence to which it cannot fail to react decides to use force, it cannot afford to take a gamble. It must have complete confidence in the credibility of its forces.
The catalogue that I have just discussed was not the only result of this conference of commitment.
We also reached agreement on continuing work to improve the quality of these forces.
The Member States committed themselves to implementing medium- and long-term tasks to improve both their operational and strategic capabilities.
We gave a particular commitment, under the current reforms of our armed forces, referred to just now by Mrs Lalumière, to continuing to increase our own capabilities and to coordinating existing projects, implementing national or multinational solutions to improve the performance of our forces.
What we need to do above all is to increase the speed of deployment, the ability to keep forces on the ground and the power of coordination, which together make up what we call the interoperability of European forces.
We must improve our strategic capabilities, especially strategic mobility, in order to rapidly move forces into the field.
We must also provide further support for the senior officers to command and control the forces and improve the resources for training them.
Finally, we wish to improve some of the European forces' operational capabilities.
In particular, we have identified research and combat rescue, defence instruments against ground-to-ground missiles, high-precision weapons and logistical support.
These incorporate most of the suggestions made in your resolution of 21 November.
I should like to make another comment on this overall project to improve European capabilities.
Some people have suggested that this illustrates the shortcomings and weaknesses of the European people.
I shall simply say, however, that these shortcomings and weaknesses have existed for a long time and that until now, no one in politics has shown any concern about this, at least at European level.
The action that we have set in motion has given Europeans the opportunity to shoulder their responsibilities, to look towards the future, potentially to use their forces to promote democratic political aims and to adopt resolutions on subjects that have remained unresolved for many years.
A new dynamic has therefore been launched on the basis of an action demonstrating political will on the part of our Member States.
This will be credible only if it lasts and that is why we have adopted a follow-up and assessment mechanism that will be adopted by the Nice Council.
This mechanism will enable us to gauge our progress.
It is underpinned, of course, by the independence of the European Union' s decision making and by the acknowledgement of the voluntary and political nature of the commitments that have been given.
It will therefore enable us to compare the commitments given by Member States with their later decisions and I think that this will encourage or inspire governments to take the appropriate decisions.
As you see, Europeans are bent on undertaking a sustained effort in order to give credibility to a European defence system.
This will require the rapid implementation of the decisions that are taken.
Our fifteen nations have set themselves the target of making this Force operational, I repeat, by 2003.
Our desire is that the permanent bodies be put in place as quickly as possible after the Nice Council.
In 2001, and this task will fall to our friends in the Swedish Presidency, the system will have to be made operational, especially the European Union' s defence staff.
This will quickly have to establish its own facilities and proper working procedures.
By 2003, when the bodies that have been established are in a position to fulfil their duties, the European Union will gradually become capable of accomplishing some of the Petersberg tasks.
These are a few remarks, which have had, out of necessity, to be concise and as a result, incomplete in order to adhere to the rules of your Parliament, on the assessment that can be made today of the real achievements in the field of military capabilities, which have already been adopted or are about to be adopted, by the Nice European Council.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I should like to take a few words to describe the profound political significance, which has been approved by the majority of public opinion in our countries, of this new task that will provide Europe with a tool for political influence that it has, until now, lacked.
This achievement is the result of a clear political will on the part of our governments, which is in stark contrast to the many disappointments that we have seen since the beginning of European integration.
For this I wish to thank my fellow Ministers for Foreign Affairs and Ministers for Defence, who have enabled this substantial progress to be made and I must, of course, thank the European Parliament for the interest it has shown in this new major project.
Mr President, as we discuss defence and security policy and conflict resolution, we should never forget the very basic reason why the European Union exists: It is the best example in the history of the world of conflict resolution.
When you examine the past century, in the first half of it we had two world wars - the worst in the history of the world - millions of dead.
Yet those same people in those same countries created European Union in that same century, and the principles that go to the heart of European Union, when applied anywhere in the world, will bring peace.
When we speak about conflict resolution why, instead of sending soldiers, do you not send this philosophy and why do you not consider setting up in the European Commission a section on peace and reconciliation and a Commissioner for peace and reconciliation, given the massive and fundamental experience of European Union and conflict resolution?
(Applause from the left)
Perhaps I can begin by commenting on what my honourable friend Mr Hume has just said.
He has done more than most as a personalised version of conflict resolution in a part of the world which I know well and has been properly commended globally for his efforts.
Of course, he is right in what he says about the contribution which the European Union has made to conflict resolution.
A Japanese-American political scientist wrote a book with the unhappy title of "The End of History" in 1989.
As we know, we have actually witnessed a good deal of history since 1989, but one point on which he was absolutely correct was that we saw in 1989 the end of a particularly shaming, and all too long, period in European history.
We all know that the genesis of the European Union, the main objective of the founding fathers was to prevent Europe tearing itself apart in yet another civil war.
That has been not the least of the achievements of the last few years, as we have consolidated liberal democracy throughout our continent, which is the great task that the French Presidency will steer us towards accomplishing in Nice.
We are now faced with the problem of ensuring that when we talk about consolidation of liberal democracy in Europe, we mean the whole of continental Europe, because that is what enlargement and the enlargement process is all about.
That is why the enlargement process is not just a strategic issue - not just an economic issue for us, but a moral issue as well - an issue very close to what the honourable gentleman was talking about when he referred to conflict resolution.
I did not come to talk about that and I should respond to my honourable friend, Mr Brok, and the honourable lady, Mrs Lalumière, and thank them for their excellent reports.
They and the motions for resolutions building upon them provide us with some extremely ambitious guidelines for our future work.
I am gratified that they are on the whole very supportive of the external action of the European Union, as it has been developed by the Council, the Commission and, since his arrival just over a year ago, my colleague, Javier Solana.
I very much agree with the content of those resolutions and reports.
It would not be sensible to try and address tonight all the points raised in those reports and resolutions, nor is now the moment to try and circumnavigate the globe in a discussion of our foreign policy.
I would like instead to make just a few remarks on some of the key elements of the ESDP and the common foreign and security policy, which are highlighted in the two reports.
As the ministers have pointed out in their excellent speeches, recent weeks have seen important developments in strengthening Europe' s contribution to its own security.
I do not want to go over the ground they have covered nor, as I have made clear very frequently, are the military aspects something for the European Commission.
They are not - repeat not - matters for the European Commission.
The only expertise I could possibly bring to the debate is that of the former commander-in-chief of the garrison in Hong Kong.
This is rightly a matter for Member States.
It is rightly a matter for ministers to decide.
It is not a matter for European Commissioners.
I find some of the coverage that the creation of this force has received in the country I know best quite extraordinary.
It is said that it undermines NATO, but NATO has, of course, made it perfectly clear that it supports what European ministers are trying to do.
We are told that the United States is opposed.
One newspaper in Britain on Sunday declared in a headline, "US to pull out of NATO if EU force goes ahead" , but the United States administration strongly supports the initiative. It has said so repeatedly.
Every time a member of the American administration points out how much they support what Europe is trying to do, someone pops up in the media of the country I know best to say they do not really understand what is in their own best interest.
Every time it happens someone else is trooped out, usually from some previous administration or some ancient period in our transatlantic relations, to say that things have changed and this would really be damaging to the relationship between Europe and the United States.
What is absolutely clear is this: first of all, what would really damage the relationship between the European Union and the United States is if we were not to go ahead with what we have now proposed - if we were not to make a success of what we have set our hands to.
Secondly, there is one other thing which we need to be clear about.
No one is suggesting that the United States intends or wants to reduce its strategic commitment to Europe.
What people do realise increasingly is there is going to be, and it is understandable, growing reluctance on the part of American public opinion to commit American lives to coping with the consequences of bloody, little European tragedies.
I was in the United States during the debates on "Larry King Live" and everywhere else during the run-up to the bombing of Yugoslavia during the Kosovo crisis.
That is exactly what the tenor of all those discussions and all those debates was then.
There is plenty of evidence, as I have said, that if we do not do more for ourselves, it will have very damaging consequences for our relationship with the United States.
In the recent history of Bosnia, we saw a situation in which some of our soldiers were very often put in intolerable positions, not just militarily but morally as well.
The recent history of Kosovo underlines the importance of Europe doing more for itself.
Now we are trying to do that, and frankly it is both fatuous and malicious to suggest that this is the creation of a European army or an attempt to kick the Americans out of Europe.
I fully agree with what my honourable friend Mr Brok has said in his overall conclusions on the Common Foreign and Security Policy.
We have come a long way since the decision in Maastricht in 1991 to take the step from political cooperation towards a common foreign policy.
Much remains to be done to develop a strong CFSP.
There is need for further reinforcement of coherence and effectiveness in the external activities of the European Union cutting across the pillars.
Experience over the past few years has made clear that European Union external action is more than just a juxtaposition of declaratory politics and technical cooperation.
We need to integrate three strands into a coherent whole, Community policies, CFSP, including ESDP, and national action by Member States.
There needs to be a sensible and sensitive partnership in the external field between the institutions of the Union, including the European Parliament, and a very close coordination with Member States.
Our challenge is to ensure that the world' s largest trading group and provider of development aid also makes its presence felt politically.
We have a real contribution to make and we must not be afraid of doing it.
For the Community, this means reforming our external assistance, improving our internal procedures and creating a framework within which we can mobilise the whole range of Community instruments in support of our agreed external objectives.
We are not seeking new competences.
We do not need new competences, but we want to exercise the powers we already have under the Treaty more effectively and I have every sympathy for the European Parliament' s desire to do the same.
Mr Védrine pointed out in his remarks the priority which we have given to reforming our external actions and to delivering our programmes more effectively and more wisely.
I have spoken a number of times to Parliament on that subject and I do not wish to do so again at any length today.
However, we have made progress and that has been largely thanks to the leadership we have received from the French Presidency.
We have worked extremely effectively together in trying to ensure that Europe' s taxpayers are able to see the sort of programmes delivered which they have every right to see and that the beneficiaries in countries all around the world get the assistance they require as rapidly as possible, supporting the most high value projects.
I note the call in the honourable gentleman' s report for common strategies on Africa, Latin America and the Western Balkans.
Dwelling for a moment on the Western Balkans, I find it difficult to accept that we need a common strategy on the Western Balkans, we actually have a rather good strategy on the Western Balkans.
It was reflected in the report which Javier Solana and I made to the Council earlier this year.
The challenge for us now is sticking to that strategy, ensuring we can make that strategy work, ensuring that, in holding out the prospect of a closer relationship with the European family, we can help those countries make the economic and political changes and reforms required in order to secure their stability and long-term prosperity.
I would like to thank the honourable lady, Madame Lalumière, for highlighting the report on conflict prevention, which the Commission is preparing together with the High Representative for the Nice European Council.
The Commission intends to follow up on this joint report with a communication next spring on the integration of conflict prevention across the board in the programming of our external assistance programmes.
On crisis management, the Commission adopted on 27 September a draft decision on the establishment of a Community mechanism for coordination of civil protection interventions in emergency situations.
This draft decision is now before the Council and I very much hope that it will be shortly adopted.
The draft regulation establishing a rapid reaction facility, which should be adopted by the end of the year, will allow the Commission under one budget line and one legal base to carry out a number of actions simultaneously so as to respond quickly to a crisis with a wide range of instruments.
I just want to repeat one thing about it, we are talking about a rapid reaction facility.
That is what the Commission is asking for.
The Commission is not involved with the creation of the rapid reaction force.
Again, I refer to the sometimes not entirely balanced and objective media in my own country, who seem to have some difficulty in comprehending that distinction.
It is an administrative measure that we want, an administrative measure to allow the occasionally slow Commission to react faster in a crisis.
Even with our laborious procedures in the Commission, we do not need a force of 60,000 soldiers to accomplish our objectives.
We do need the support of Parliament in helping us get these draft regulations approved as rapidly as possible.
Like the minister, I will just say a word in response to the honourable gentleman, Mr Brok, on Afghanistan.
We are concerned, as the minister said he was, at the recent upsurge in fighting in the northeast of Afghanistan, concerned at the resultant worsening of the humanitarian situation of the population, many thousands of whom have had to flee their homes in order to avoid the conflict.
The European Union through its common position on Afghanistan of 14 January earlier this year is committed among other things to the objective of bringing about a sustainable peace in Afghanistan.
In this it supports the central role of the United Nations through its special envoy, Mr Vendrell, in trying to bring the parties of the conflict together in an effort to establish a broad-based government for the country.
The European Union also encouraged other peace efforts, including those of the six plus two group, the initiatives of the former king and the Organisation of the Islamic Conference, in their efforts to intercede to bring about peace in Afghanistan.
At the same time, the European Union continues to urge countries concerned to stop the involvement of their military, paramilitary and secret service personnel in Afghanistan and cease provision of all other military support to parties in the Afghan conflict.
With respect to the provision of aid, the Commission largely through its humanitarian aid office, ECHO, has made a number of specific interventions this year aimed at alleviating both the effects of the catastrophic drought in the country by supporting, through provision of funds for food security and winterisation kits, the population's displaced by the fighting in the northeast of the country.
So far this year, these commitments and those in preparation have totalled more than EUR 14 million.
Member States also made individual contributions in addition to those sums.
Lastly, can I underline what others have already said.
We have come an extraordinary long way in a remarkably short time.
People who occasionally accuse the European Union of sclerosis, of not being able to take initiatives, of not being able to show vision, of not being able to move forward and respond to the problems of the modern world, should perhaps look at the progress that has been made in the last months in a very short period towards the creation of a CFSP which has its own integrity and very substantial potential value.
It is a remarkable contribution.
I hope we in the Commission will be able to make a contribution to the sensible discussion of conflict prevention.
Our other major contribution is to show that we can manage the jobs that we have already been given, a lot more competently in the future than we have managed in the past.
Thank you very much, Commissioner Patten.
(The sitting was suspended at 8.10 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m.)
Mr President, Mr Brok has made it perfectly clear what our group thinks of the progress achieved in the field of defence and of the distance that still needs to be covered here.
I shall confine myself to saying here, addressing Mrs Lalumière, that our group will be approving her excellent report tomorrow.
But let me concentrate for now on the situation in Afghanistan.
I was there in June and I witnessed both the plight of the refugees and the fanaticism of the Taliban fighters with whom I spoke.
Since the fall of Talokan in September, which led to our Parliament's first resolution and has triggered today's debate, the situation has continued to worsen, especially in humanitarian terms.
The Talokan offensive cut off the only route of supply to the Panchir Valley and the Shomali Plains, where Commander Massood's forces are concentrated, as also a large proportion of the uprooted people and refugees.
Quite clearly, there is no military solution in this area, as has been said, and I therefore took note of the statements the Presidency of the Council made a short while ago, when it committed itself to apply all the necessary pressure on the neighbouring countries, and in particular Pakistan, to persuade them to stop interfering here and to seek a political settlement.
But what we really must look at, I repeat, is the humanitarian situation, which is becoming increasingly precarious.
Today there are more than 30 000 families, of whom half have no shelter, who are living in complete deprivation in the Shomali Plains, in the Panchir Valley and in the northern region where communications with Tajikistan remain very difficult.
Fifty percent means 15 000 families.
The temperature in the region just now is between minus 3 and minus 6 degrees and the only provisions these families have received over the past month is one sack of wheat.
So it is extremely urgent to provide humanitarian aid.
I think that has already been called for.
A food depot should be set up in Dushanbe. I think we should consider establishing an air bridge, as we managed to do in other times and other places.
It is a matter of the very survival of the people there.
Mr President, I intend to concentrate on Mrs Lalumière' s report in my intervention.
On behalf of the entire PSE Group, I would like to express my admiration for the outstanding report by Catherine Lalumière, our highly esteemed fellow Member.
My group supports her position and we are grateful for the well-balanced text, which brings out the right points.
As you will all be aware, there is to be a new approach to the common foreign and security policy; in which the civilian component will be deemed to be at least as important as the military component.
The setting up of the rapid reaction force seems to be coming on apace, for which we extend our compliments.
The Member States have made promises that do justice to previously articulated ambitions.
Now it is matter of forging an effective and efficient European unit from this, under a clear and unambiguous command.
That will be the real test for the European Union in my view.
A new dimension is being added to the common foreign and security policy.
This makes effective parliamentary control an absolute necessity.
Do the Council and the Commission go along with the proposals in the Lalumière report on that score?
There are two other remarks we would like to make.
The developments I have described will give fresh impetus to the European arms industry, and it certainly needs it.
But we want to avoid pressure on exports, which is why we want to improve the rules on arms exports, and we will support an amendment to this end.
My group recognises that there will be discussion of the various facets, but is seeking new methods via restructuring in the first instance.
We do not rule out the possibility of increasing defence expenditure, but that will have to be assessed on its own merits, also in line with other priorities, for example in the social and economic field.
Of course we are much taken with the emphasis the report places on the civilian component of the common foreign and security policy.
The impression is sometimes given that the future of the CFSP stands or falls with the establishment of an autonomous military capacity.
Is this appropriate?
Not if the press is anything to go by at any rate.
The rapid reaction force is intended to implement the Petersberg tasks.
However, we must not exaggerate the importance of this.
Although I do not agree with the cynics who say that it will provide Europe with a pointless toy, it is true that the rapid reaction force will not be immediately deployable in many situations.
We regard it as an instrument that can be deployed alongside others, or better still, as one that can be deployed after other instruments, where possible.
Conflict prevention is to be preferred over military crisis management.
The EU is better equipped than NATO, for example, for such peaceful conflict prevention tasks.
We want to strengthen this capacity.
We are sometimes sceptical about the European Union' s efforts in this respect.
We have developed a kind of fixation with the military instrument.
It appears easier to get results using this method.
Lip service is often paid to the second part of the Helsinki Decisions, in our view.
Such criticism is often responded to with a reference to the headline goals for police deployment or the rapid reaction facility that is now being launched by the Commission.
We support these steps but more must be done to strengthen the civilian aspects of the European security policy.
We want scenarios and coherent planning.
What instruments will we need and when?
The key to the European Union is its civilian basis and that is what we want to see clearly brought out in the Union' s foreign policy.
Mr President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, it often takes a very long time before visible results can be discerned when issues are dealt with at European level.
Impatient citizens complain that the wheels of European bureaucracy turn infinitely slowly.
However, things have happened amazingly quickly within the field of European security policy since the decision to set up a joint European rapid reaction force was taken in December 1999 in Helsinki.
These are welcome developments.
We need to show ourselves and the countries around us that Europe has the strength and the will in future to prevent tragedies such as that in the Balkans.
Naturally, the EU must take increased responsibility for conflict-prevention measures, crisis management, peacekeeping operations etc in the immediate vicinity of the European Union.
Those of us in the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party entirely support Mr Brok' s report.
We also back Mrs Lalumière' s report in the main.
We nonetheless think that the importance of not developing structures which overlap with those of NATO cannot be emphasised enough.
It therefore seems a little unnecessary to regulate in great detail how, for example, European forces in space are to be organised.
It is important to safeguard the transatlantic link and the United States' s continued commitment to Europe.
The EU ought not to develop its own defence involving permanent troops.
As I say, things are developing quickly.
In the course of the week, country after country has reported on how many soldiers, aircraft, submarines etc it can contribute to make the rapid reaction force operational.
Judging from the debate in a number of Member States, many people are clearly rather bewildered by the debate.
Commissioner Patten gave a first-hand account of the debate in Great Britain.
In another country close to my heart, the debate has been quite heated.
In Sweden, a somewhat sluggish debate about neutrality is taking place, a concept which most of us perceive as a hangover from the days of the Cold War and as not being relevant today.
Those of us in the European Parliament, who represent the people of Europe, nonetheless have an additional responsibility to lead this debate and to discuss, and conduct a critical examination of, defence and security policy in the form in which it is developing.
This means that, as MEPs, we need structures to enable us to obtain information about the decisions made and to enable us to engage in debate, to participate and to hold people to account.
However, citizens too must, as far as possible, be given access to information and documents.
This is crucial if the policy in question is to win people' s confidence.
Last summer' s so-called Solana decision was criticised vociferously in this Chamber.
The decision meant that all documents relating to foreign and security policy were to be automatically exempt from public scrutiny.
That is unacceptable, of course.
It is also why we have asked the Court of Justice to examine this decision.
The same ideas about the greatest possible transparency were expressed in Mr Cashman' s report which we adopted with a broad majority two weeks ago in Strasbourg.
I am therefore hoping for broad support for the Liberal amendments which deal specifically with the issues of transparency and public access to documentation.
Finally, I want to express my group' s considerable concern about the ever worsening situation in Afghanistan and urge the Commission and the Council to do all they can to increase their efforts to achieve a peaceful solution and to support the civilian population, especially now before the winter sets in.
Mr President, Mr Richard, Commissioner, I would like to restrict my contribution to two important sections of the report by Mrs Lalumière.
The first section I am referring to is the one on conflict prevention and crisis management.
I am delighted that this constitutes such an important part of her report because it is based on the analysis - which, if I am honest, has been made by the Greens before now, and on more than one occasion - that the European Union' s strength resides in its ability to prevent conflicts, and that we will only have to be able to seek recourse to military means - sadly - as a last resort.
I think the Stability Pact for the Balkans is a good example of this.
As I see it, it sets an example of how things should be done in the European Union, and it demonstrates that by taking various measures, for example in the field of democracy, support for the free press, and in the field of education, conflict prevention policy can help us to keep the lid on the situation.
What I am hoping, and I would like to echo the sentiments of Mr Wiersma in this respect, is that what the report has to say on conflict prevention is not just paying lip service but will actually be translated into concrete goals, in which money and political will are to be invested. Otherwise we will be even worse off, i.e. by promising great things but not living up to them.
The second section I would like to come back to is the military section.
This contains two points of criticism put forward by my group, which, to our satisfaction, have ended up in Mrs Lalumière' s report.
The first point concerns the role of the European Parliament, which is something several other speakers have already touched on.
It is still completely unclear in the current proposals as to what that role should be.
As I see it, the European Parliament should be directly involved in drawing up the much-needed strategic concept in the future, and also, if it comes to it, in the decision on whether to deploy the European peacekeeping force.
I have a very specific question for Mr Richard on that score.
Reports are constantly appearing in the Dutch press to the effect that there is a secret protocol appended to the Saint Malo Agreement - which his country concluded with England early this year - in which both countries, France and England, say, and promise each other that the European Parliament will never have any authority over any aspect of the security policy.
I would like to hear what Mr Richard has to say to this and ask him what he thinks Parliament' s role ought to be if there is no such secret protocol.
The second point of criticism, which is also included in the report by Mrs Lalumière, concerns the lack of any strategic concept.
Quite simply: where, when and how is this European intervention force expected to take action in the future?
It is a complete mystery to me.
I was therefore slightly perplexed, if I am honest, last week, when Mr Solana' s answer to the question as to whether we have a strategic concept or not, was a straightforward 'yes' . He said: 'yes, we do have a strategic concept, now all we need is the troops' .
I would like to ask Mr Richard if he agrees with Mr Solana on that point.
Is there a strategic concept?
And if there is one, could he show me where it is written down as I would very much like to read it.
Lastly, one point of criticism, which is not, I am sorry to say, included in Mrs Lalumière' s report, is the financial aspect.
I think Parliament' s message must be crystal-clear: we support this development but it will entail making cutbacks in the current standing armies, so as to allow for investment in new methods which we too consider to be necessary.
Mr President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, Mr Vice-President of the Commission, another member of my group, Mr Modrow, will be speaking on defence matters.
For my part, I shall confine myself to what Mr Brok's report terms a cornerstone of the CFSP, ensuring peace and freedom, and conflict prevention.
Let me just give one example - one which is extremely topical and most significant in terms of how we must change our policy - namely the Middle East.
Here Mr Brok rightly deplores, and I quote, "the persistent inability of the Union to play a constructive role", and in this case the responsibility does not lie with the French Presidency.
I have just returned from a visit to Israel and Palestine last week, where I led a delegation from my group.
I can tell you that the Palestinians have great expectations of Europe.
If you fly a European flag on your car, you can go anywhere, even into the most miserable refugee camp.
We must not disappoint these expectations.
What do they expect of us?
Basically, three things that are within our reach, provided we ourselves and each of our governments show a degree of political courage.
The first thing they expect is for us to call for international observers to be sent out to protect the people concerned.
Let us simply repeat what Mrs Mary Robinson said to the UN Commissioner for human rights: not more, but not less.
What we saw in the hospital in Gaza, for instance, was truly horrific.
That has to stop.
If you have any doubts, I would advise you to read an interview published in the major Israeli daily Haretz on 20 November this year, which reveals the unbelievable orders given to Israeli marksmen facing Palestinians over the age of 12.
It gives some idea of the terrible toll of these two months of intifada: 270 dead, most of them Palestinian, and nearly 10 000 wounded, many of them crippled for life.
Secondly, we should dare to call on the Israeli Government to put a halt to its military escalation, which can only set back any hope of peace.
I am saying that not in a spirit of hostility but out of a sense of responsibility, in the well-considered interest of both Israel and the entire Mediterranean basin.
Of course we must strongly condemn all attacks against Israeli civilians, like the terrible attack on a school bus.
We did so immediately, on the spot.
But it is not by bombarding Gaza, after plunging it into darkness to impress its people more, or by bombing the villages of the Bethlehem region fifteen times, villages we also visited, that one can hope to escape this spiral of violence.
Thirdly, we should call for new peace negotiations to begin, based on the same principles that we uphold in all the other parts of the world, namely the requirement of respect for international law and the Geneva Conventions, the requirement of respect for the United Nations resolutions.
In this case, that means an end to the occupation, including that of East Jerusalem, the dismantling of the settlements and recognition of the refugee problem.
It is the constant violation of these fundamental rights, despite seven years of negotiations, and the resulting exasperation that lie at the core of this popular revolt.
So it is these problems that we must resolve if we are to see a return to peace, to a lasting peace.
For the rest, many Israelis agree and opinions polls show that over and above any voting intentions, an absolute majority of them accept the idea of a global peace agreement with the Palestinians, including the dismantling of the settlements.
As an association of soldiers' mothers stated, we did not take our children out of Lebanon just so that they could die for the settlements.
That is why I believe that Europe must decide to act now.
If it does so along the lines I have described, Europe will not only live up to the expectations of the Palestinian people but will also underpin the current of opinion within Israel in favour of a just peace and give itself a worthy and respectable image in the world.
Then, and only then, will it have a chance to overcome its impotence in the Middle East and in the Mediterranean region.
Mr President, I would like to concentrate on Amendment No 1 to the Brok report, which concerns the setting up of an International Tribunal for Saddam Hussain' s reign of terror.
There is no lack of reliable information on the nature of the present Iraqi regime.
The flood of reports is still growing by the day.
Nevertheless, the 'Republic of Fear' , as Saddam' s reign of terror was appropriately dubbed many years ago, is still greatly underestimated by many western politicians, also within the European Parliament.
However, this erroneous assessment could have disastrous consequences, because according to what he says, the Gulf War is far from over in Sadism Hussain's eyes.
Hence his relentless efforts to build up an arsenal of extremely sinister weapons of mass destruction.
After all, who is there to prevent him from doing so?
He has kept UN inspection teams out for quite some time now.
Incidentally, this brutal Iraqi autocrat is advocating a massive Arab attack on the State of Israel, indeed worse still, a full-blown Jihad, a Holy War.
What, in all fairness, could be more obvious than the need to firmly contain the potential threat posed by Saddam?
In point of fact, how do the Council and the Commission view the situation at the present time?
One would appear to be justified in fearing that there is no question of our establishing a European CFSP to deal with this crucial danger to world peace.
At all events, the consequences of a failed sanctions regime against Baghdad are incalculable.
Owing to misplaced pleas for the suffering of the Iraqi people - as if we really believe that Saddam lacks the financial means to alleviate this - the tyrant of the Tigris is gradually being given more room to manoeuvre on the international scene.
To what end?
To wreak death and destruction in his own country and beyond.
In a nutshell, it is high time that the UN set up an International Tribunal to conduct a thorough investigation into, and try, all the crimes perpetrated by Saddam' s 'Republic of Fear' .
An initiative to this effect would certainly lend credibility to the CFSP of the European Union.
Hence our enthusiastic support for Amendment No 1 of the Brok report.
Mr President, these progress reports on the common foreign and security policy, which are certainly very comprehensive and informative, also mercilessly expose the regrettable weaknesses of the Union in this domain.
Among the performances that surely give us no cause for pride are our rather embarrassing uncoordinated attempts to act as a mediator in the Middle East conflict.
I believe that we Europeans bear a special responsibility for peace in the Middle East, a responsibility which we do not exercise and which is evidently beyond our capabilities.
The one-sided apportionment of blame which we have been hearing in this House, the condemnations of one side or the other in this conflict and the discrepancies in the voting patterns of the EU Member States at the United Nations on 21 October of this year - which one of the rapporteurs quite rightly criticised, by the way - have further reduced the Union's chances of assuming a productive and responsible role in the Middle East.
We are not talking here about different interpretations of the causes of the conflict by the individual EU Member States and by various politicians, which is something the political leaders might finally come to recognise.
The only thing we are talking about is supporting a peace process and gaining the trust of the parties to this conflict.
Both a viable Palestinian state and Israel's legitimate security requirements must be recognised by all members of the Union, otherwise we shall never adopt a common position on the peace efforts, and Europe will lose every ounce of credibility as a mediator alongside the United States.
The Middle East conflict could therefore become the acid test of the efficiency of European Middle East policy.
If we as Europeans cannot play a responsible role in the resolution of this conflict, independently of the United States, we must assume that we shall not be trusted to act as a mediator in any other regional conflicts either.
Mr President, it is essential that we recognise that in recent months there has been considerable progress in the field of the common foreign and security policy, and that the credit for much of it must be given to the High Representative.
Furthermore, as the French Minister for Defence pointed out, there has been progress in the field of defence policy.
I believe that the establishment in record time of the interim committees in the Council, the Member States' ability to commit their contributions to the creation of the rapid reaction force and the very presence of Mr Richard in the work of Parliament - in its Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy and in Parliament itself - are all to be welcomed and deserve our consideration.
I would like to highlight very clearly the progress made by the French Presidency in the field of common foreign and security policy and in the field of defence policy, and I wish to say this particularly because, in the previous debate on the European Council in Nice, certain reservations were expressed on the progress made in general during this presidency.
Nevertheless, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, I believe that we should not be deceived, because the French Presidency will fundamentally be judged, not on the achievements with regard to common foreign and security policy, nor with regard to defence policy, but on the results of the European Council in Nice, which are truly essential to the promotion of our project.
I, like Mr Patten this afternoon, am not going to comment on the whole of the European Union' s external action, but I would just like to concentrate on three points which I believe deserve to be highlighted.
Firstly, the debate which has taken place as a result of the words of the German Foreign Minister at the Humboldt University, as a result of President Chirac' s speech in Berlin, the speech by the British Prime Minister in Prague, and the articles by the Italian Prime Minister and by the Swedish Foreign Minister that appeared recently in the press.
All of these stressed the intergovernmental aspect, rather than the Community aspect, of the CFSP.
Mr Giddens, the ideologue of what has come to be called the 'third way' , said that the Commission is going through a political decline and that the centre of gravity should be shifted towards other bodies, that is, towards the Council.
Mr President-in-Office of the Council, to us, action undertaken by the Commission and the interinstitutional balance are fundamental.
Secondly, despite what the previous speaker said, I do not know whether it would be possible or desirable for the European Union to do any more than it is currently doing in relation to the conflict and escalation of violence which has taken place in the Middle East, especially now, when the United States is going through a transitional period.
I imagine that the 43rd President of the United States will soon be named, but I think that this would be a good time for the European Union to double its efforts and assert its presence in a conflict which is so close by.
Lastly, I would like to comment on Latin America.
I wonder - I will ask Mr Patten this question when the time comes - whether the directives for negotiation which the European Union and the Commission are currently debating with Chile and Mercosur, adopted in light of the Seattle Summit, should be revised, given the failings of that summit, and whether it would be discriminatory to conclude these agreements on the condition that a new round of the WTO should take place.
I believe that this really is a discriminatory condition, which should now be adapted in light of the new circumstances.
Mr President, I would like to end by saying that interinstitutional balance is very important to us, that the Commission should be given the role that it deserves, and that the internal dimension which is being consolidated in the European Union should correspond to its external activities.
Mr President, Minister, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, we have two very important reports to deal with today and an important question relating to the dreadful intolerable situation in Afghanistan.
Nevertheless, I should like to concentrate on the Lalumière report, because it documents the progress that has undoubtedly been achieved in the domain of European defence and security policy and sets that progress in a balanced and democratic framework.
It is balanced, because the report makes it quite clear that we need three things: the first is an analysis of the various risk factors in and around Europe, the second is prevention, and the third is civilian crisis management.
Only if all of that is to no avail do we need military crisis management.
It will not always be possible to take these steps one after the other in chronological order, but we need the entire package, and the fact is that only all of these factors together will make a coherent, balanced defence and security policy in Europe.
The report, however, also brings a democratic framework into play, and I should like to lay particular emphasis on that here.
Minister, I should like to say a special word of thanks to you for having been with us in committee and for being here today.
However, your personal commitment must not be seen as a substitute for democratic legitimisation of the European security and defence policy.
Defence policy, the question of defence spending, is a national matter and must be determined and overseen by the national parliaments.
There is, however, a European level of security policy, and the European Parliament acts as a budgetary authority for security expenditure at that level.
We need cooperation between the national and European levels, and we also need democratic supervision.
I realise, Minister, that you are sceptical and that you have just said 'No' again, as you did in Paris on a previous occasion, but this Parliament still believes in these principles, irrespective of party allegiance, and we shall go on campaigning for their acceptance.
Allow me one final plea: enhance European defence policy by giving it a parliamentary democratic dimension.
Mr President, I would like to focus in my speech on Mrs Lalumière' s report, which I think is clearly worded and well put together.
The decision taken at the Helsinki summit to establish a rapid reaction force has been interpreted in different ways by the Member States.
In Finland and Sweden they speak about crisis management, which in these countries chiefly means a traditional peacekeeping operation.
Mrs Lalumière' s report reflects the thinking of many NATO countries, according to which a rapid reaction force would very quickly develop into a fully-fledged army capable of warfare.
It would have at its disposal, among other things, heavy transport aircraft, aircraft carriers, cruise missiles, and in-flight refuelling for long-distance bombing missions.
The Finnish people have not been told anything about this.
In my opinion, Europe' s military identity should have been established in the context of NATO, then the EU could just stick to the task of crisis management.
I cannot approve of the EU becoming a military alliance and a military superpower.
Now that the development of the EU' s military dimension has begun, it is wise to aim for a situation where the Union should be internally differentiated in this area also.
The NATO countries could form a defence organisation within the framework of the Union that would function as a strong European pillar of NATO.
In this way other EU Member States could keep to their traditional peacekeeping activities.
I cannot accept certain details of Mrs Lalumière' s report, and in the final vote I shall support its rejection.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the European Union has yet to substantiate adequately its claim to exercise responsibility for peace and above all for lasting stability in the world.
Yet the Union would be unrivalled in that domain if only it would improve the existing instruments and especially its present potential for civilian conflict prevention and apply them coherently.
The unfortunate fact is that the trauma of Kosovo was followed by a hectic flurry of activity which was channelled in an entirely wrong direction.
Concentration on purely reactive crisis management has thrown the common foreign and security policy totally out of synch.
No government would take responsibility for sending its country's troops into a region on an open-ended assignment without clear political objectives.
But there are no clear political objectives, and there is still effectively no common foreign and security policy.
National interests continue to prevail, especially when diplomatic activity is on the agenda.
We have just seen the examples in The Hague.
We have the example of the Middle East conflict.
It is absurd to detach European foreign policy from the institutions responsible for most of the instruments that are essential to its pursuit.
These are not my own words; they were spoken by Commissioner Patten, and he is perfectly correct.
It is equally absurd to concentrate the bulk of the available financial resources on military equipment.
If we perceive European foreign policy as nothing more than a support instrument for European arms-manufacturing consortia, we have completely misunderstood its function.
It can only recover credibility if the civilian approach is its supreme guiding principle, if the instruments at its disposal are used in pursuit of effective prevention and if those instruments receive a level of funding that maintains their credibility.
Neglect of this wide range of instruments of non-military conflict prevention would turn out to be a mistake in the long run, and in that respect I am dissatisfied with the Council's statements to the effect that we have already taken decisions, but that things will move in this general direction.
This is by no means certain, because it is also apparent that these decisions are based entirely on the reactive approach.
Civilian conflict prevention, and I stress the word 'prevention', cannot be a mere appendage of military intervention.
It will not be fully effective until we have overcome the trauma of Kosovo and Srebrenica, until we return to a policy of active prevention and begin to deploy our available resources long before the alarm bells start ringing and until we are fully committed to defusing potential crises and eliminating possible causes of escalation.
This means that curbing arms exports to unstable regions must be the first aim for the Council to pursue, that trade policies must be fair, that assistance must be given to encourage the sustainable development of countries in volatile regions and, above all, that the democratic forces in civil society must be supported.
The promotion of regional cooperation is another valuable instrument.
The EU has only one problem in this domain, namely the fact that it has yet to arouse public interest in this sort of action, even though such measures are considerably more sustainable and effective than military intervention.
Mr President, a German conservative, Mr Brok, and a French socialist have joined together on what I see as a disgraceful tack in order to present us with two mutually complementary reports and motions for resolutions, each of which rivals the other in its interventionist militarism.
These resolutions, together with the interventions of the presidents of the foreign and defence ministers and Mr Patten, leave us in no doubt whatsoever as to the extent of the militarisation and aggression of the European Union.
Both motions passionately support the creation of a terrifying military machine, spearheaded by a rapid reaction force of 50 000 to 60 000 men or, as Mr Richard has just told us, 100,000 men, with air and sea support and even aircraft carriers being mobilised.
The stated aim, which I admit with a cynicism which makes me shudder, is for the European Union to be able to intervene militarily on the territory of third countries, in order to prevent and manage crises which threaten European values and interests, without so much as a resolution by the UN Security Council, given that all that is required is the approval of its Secretary-General.
And just to be on the safe side, both motions explain away the criminal objectives of the famous CFSP by proposing that all countries in the European Union have professional, i.e. mercenary armies which will, of course, carry out their orders without question and without hesitation.
This, they tell us, will enable operations such as the criminal bombing of Yugoslavia and the continuing occupation of Kosovo to be carried out more successfully and at the initiative of the European Union, which will back up and complement ÍÁÔÏ.
What about Mr Brok's contention that the aim of the CFSP is to deal with massive attack from the Soviet bloc.
Obviously, no-one has told him that, unfortunately for mankind, there is no longer any such bloc.
One thing is clear and that is that nothing has changed since 1990; as far as our rapporteurs and those at the helm of the European Union are concerned, the enemy is still those who refuse to bow down to the new imperialist order, those who fight it, the grass-roots movement which is beginning to react - as is only natural - against the barbaric foreign, economic and social policy of the European Union, which provokes hatred between peoples, and leads to war, unemployment and impoverishment.
This is the enemy which your CFSP has in its sights.
As I am sure you will have understood, we intend to vote against both reports and we promise to fight tooth and nail against policies which express ...
(The President cut the speaker off)
Mr President, I intend to concentrate on Mrs Lalumière' s report, for which I have the greatest respect, because I feel that as a report, it takes a very practical approach to issues concerning our security and that of others around us.
But firstly I would like to comment on a number of statements that other speakers have just made.
They have spoken most impressively and sympathetically about the order in which steps should be taken, i.e. first preventive action, using as many peaceful methods as possible, and only then, military methods.
On hearing this you say: 'yes, of course that is quite right' , but this appeal would in fact suggest that the European Union and the European Member States have been far too quick to seize their weapons in the past, in different contexts.
History has taught us that, sadly, this often happened far too late and that if it had happened earlier, hundreds of thousands of lives might have been spared.
So I do not actually think this assertion is correct.
Again, I readily support any efforts to take preventive action in order to avoid war and all kinds of violence, but, of course, we must not twist the facts.
I believe, Mr President, that if you were to ask the public for their opinion, you would find that they think we deal with foreign policy and security here in the European Parliament, and that this is also where the centre of gravity of our decision-making power lies, which is not the case.
The trouble is that the Council of fifteen Ministers takes the decisions on these matters, and it all proceeds rather slowly, and then Parliament gets the blame.
I am therefore delighted that we are now making progress.
We also have the French Defence Minister in our midst, which must make it an historic occasion.
What he said in his speech was an inspiration to us all.
We have been able to see that progress is being made of course.
We also warmly applaud the efforts undertaken by Mr Patten - whom we hold in very high esteem, as we do Mr Solana - because something is being done at last.
I think Mrs Lalumière also makes an extremely practical comment in her report where she says that it would be an excellent idea for Mr Solana to effect coordination between the Member States, and for Commissioner Patten to generate more initiative from the Commission' s side.
Ideally, these two should be fused into one person.
I have been known to comment in the past that they should at least be regarded as identical twins, but the fusion idea would be far better still within the context of the Commission.
I feel Mrs Lalumière outlines some outstanding possibilities.
If we take a leaf out of her book, perhaps we will be able to ensure that all our resources are deployed in a more effective manner, both those used in preventive actions and those used in military actions, if necessary within the Petersberg framework, as well as the action that follows military action, such as that required in Kosovo at the present time.
We need police officers out there, but also people who can keep the wheels of administration turning, and who can take over the role of mayor somewhere, for example.
These are all officials whom I think could be dealt with extremely well as part of Mr Patten' s portfolio, along with his rapid reaction facility.
That is an extremely important element because the European Commission has a great deal of authority over it, which means that we as a Parliament can exercise a great deal of control.
So I am certainly inclined to make it a very important priority.
Mr President, then there is the budget, of course, and the question as to how it should be apportioned.
There are some sound comments on this in the report, and I believe that we should follow Mrs Lalumière' s example and give preference to financing it via the Community budget, then it will be apportioned fairly from the outset and we will also have control over it.
Speaking of control, of course the European Parliament must take on more and more tasks from the Western European Union and its assembly.
I think that would be a good move.
I also think that we are being prudent and realistic for the present, in our assessment that when it comes to the practical deployment of troops, the national parliaments are set to retain a large capability for a very long time, and perhaps for ever, and that we therefore need a forum where we can come together with the national parliaments for that reason.
It is not a control body we need but a forum, and I would gladly give it my blessing.
Mr President, the report before us gives the EU carte blanche to establish a military intervention capacity.
I regard that as unacceptable.
In the early part of 1990, when it was foreseeable that the Warsaw Treaty would collapse, the Government of the German Democratic Republic which I headed adopted a new military doctrine based on freedom from nuclear weapons, on international security partnership and on gradual disarmament.
Non-use of force was our principle.
The end of the confrontation between the two blocs had rendered NATO superfluous.
Yet instead of dissolving itself, NATO is mutating from a defensive into an offensive power and alliance and is spreading its radius of action ever further eastward.
The arguments advanced today for the creation of an EU intervention force resemble those that have been put forward for the continuing existence of NATO.
This move is not primarily designed to pacify trouble spots but rather to permit the use of military means to safeguard access to markets, raw materials and spheres of interest.
I am in favour of the EU continuing to make peacekeeping the hallmark of its foreign and security policy and to detach itself from the apron strings of the United States. This, however, depends on a completely different set of conditions.
First of all, the war that was fought against Yugoslavia in defiance of international law and the results of that war, such as the new tensions in southern Serbia, show that military force must not become a political instrument again.
Secondly, NATO should be gradually winding down rather than engaging in eastward enlargement.
Thirdly, a nuclear-free corridor, such as Olaf Palme once suggested, should be created from the Baltic to the Black Sea.
Fourthly, the OSCE must be strengthened and endowed with enough resources for the prevention and resolution of conflicts in accordance with the fundamental principles of its security policy and not through the creation of storm troops.
Fifthly, the United Nations should be asked to convene a world peace summit, at which lessons can be drawn from the wars of the twentieth century so that the peoples of this earth will be offered the prospect of a peaceful twenty-first century.
Europe could set an example here, and the creation of an intervention force is surely the wrong signal for it to send.
I have to say that there is much in the Brok report that we can support, in particular the importance attached to enlargement of the European Union.
However we have concerns in particular about the nature of common European security and defence policy.
I say this in spite of the mass of apparent reassurances on this subject that have miraculously been generated in the past few days.
If the proposed European capabilities were indeed designed to reinforce NATO or the options for the alliance, we would have few difficulties.
But this is not the case.
The Union is bent on establishing an autonomous capability in pursuit of European political integration.
Mr Richard says he does not want to compete with NATO but he does want to compete with America in the security policy arena.
Among other ambitions, Mr Brok proposes that the European Union should set its military operational sights on a zone of instability in Asia, from Afghanistan to the China sea.
He mentioned Kashmir - I find this alarming.
The Lalumière report wants EU military operations to be funded from the Community budget and even those not participating would be expected to pay up as well.
There is a proposal to turn to Russia for long-range air transport and yesterday the Russians suggested common intelligence-gathering with the European Union.
There are some here who would prefer Russia rather than America as a strategic partner.
Mrs Lalumière and Mr Brok want EU defence policy to be under the control of a Vice-President of the Commission, who would assume the CFSP responsibilities of the Secretary-General of the Council.
Under this scheme the Commission would run defence policy.
This is all barmy stuff.
The Commission should concentrate on its civil external assistance programmes, military matters should be left to the nations on an intergovernmental basis.
Let NATO first decide how it would deal with a crisis and then, if required, Europeans, having developed greater capability, could indeed assume responsibility for a particular task, as agreed in NATO four years ago.
Let us not pretend that the present proposals have this in mind.
I cannot tell you how delighted I am to discover that Mr Brok all along was a dangerous revolutionary!
Could I congratulate Mrs Lalumière on her report.
Clearly we have made huge leap forwards on European defence cooperation in the last 12 months or so, but there are certain things we need to bear in mind.
Firstly, a key factor must be to maintain the consistency of the European Union's external policy.
Unless Pillars 1, 2 and 3 are working towards the common goal, any other mechanism we set up is bound for failure.
So we must always hold that in mind.
Secondly, while attention has inevitably been focused in recent weeks on the military dimension, we must not lose sight of the need for civilian conflict prevention and one cannot be at the expense of the other, otherwise you are actually pulling in opposite ways.
Thirdly, while I welcome the Rapid Reaction Force, we have to be clear from Europe's perspective, as we only get one chance to get this right.
It is not a question of not being halfway in or halfway out, there has to be a clear commitment by all the Member States involved to making this work.
We should not therefore try to force this to do anything it is not intended to.
NATO of course is the arm of collective defence of Europe and the West.
The Rapid Reaction Force's job is peacekeeping and peacemaking and the Petersberg tasks.
To do that we have to have the capability.
At the moment we are grossly short of that capability and ultimately Member States have to consider their defence expenditure plans, which are dramatically different from one country to another.
I would like ultimately to see us move towards greater convergence of defence expenditure.
We also need proper coordination.
No duplication, not only with NATO, but no duplication within EU Member States.
We should be working together and coordinating.
We should move towards greater European procurement policy, so we have a more efficient defence industry delivering better value for money.
Mr President, there are three things I want to point out. First of all, Mrs Lalumière' s report contains a whole programme setting out how the EU is to become a military superpower within the fairly near future.
It is perhaps hard to see why, bearing in mind that Europe has no enemies and is not threatened by any military power.
Secondly, the report is mainly concerned with military offensives outside the EU' s own territory.
As a superpower, the EU is to be able to intervene anywhere in the world where the EU' s interests or values are threatened.
In this way, the EU is to be an equivalent of the United States in the area of military intervention, too.
I am convinced that this policy would be greeted with distrust by the people of Europe if they only knew about it.
Thirdly, the very comprehensive report does not say a word about the non-aligned States or about neutrality as such.
The farthest it goes in that direction is a scornful reference in paragraph 5 of the explanatory statement to 'neutral' countries (in inverted commas).
The non-aligned countries must protest loudly and clearly against wordings of that kind and against the report as a whole.
Mr President, I want to congratulate Mr Brok on the vigorously pan-European approach he has adopted both in his intervention and in his report.
I concur with his arguments about enlargement.
He notes that the accession negotiations involving twelve new Member States have proved to be the most effective instrument for stabilising the Mediterranean area, together with Central and Eastern Europe.
The priority now is to do all we can to strengthen the conditions for freedom and peace in Europe.
Mr Brok' s report also discusses the post of High Representative for the CFSP.
I think that the present 'relationship' is unsustainable in the long term.
It is an exciting debate we are having this evening.
I welcome the unanimity and frankness with which, as MEPs, we are now discussing the Lalumière report on the European Union' s security and defence policy.
If they are to be credible, I believe it is important for the Members of the Council to say the same thing in Brussels and the EU as they do in their own countries.
In my country, Sweden, there is a Foreign Minister who demands that there should be a UN mandate for EU operations.
The debate in Sweden is very much about the extent to which Sweden, as a Member of the EU, is a neutral country.
Astounding, but true.
I also believe it is extremely important for those ambitions which the EU is now expressing to be backed by practical resources.
Otherwise, they are in danger of becoming nothing but empty words.
Finally, I want to point out how important it is for the political leaders of the European Union to involve the people of Europe in these important and far-reaching plans by making it clear to them how very ambitious the plans now are.
Mr President, today we are debating two politically important reports, both of which basically concern the CFSP.
As it takes shape, the CFSP will experience numerous ups and downs; however, it will help realise our dream of a political Europe.
Even those who speculate as to the benefits of certain decisions, such as the decision to create a so-called Euro-army, cannot fail to see the important political dimension of this decision and its effect on the cohesion of the European Union.
In all events, the peaceful resolution of any conflict must be our creed.
If it is to retain its political attraction, the CFSP needs to be determined on the basis of the Member States of the European Union, not on the basis of isolationist or exclusionist rationales, but as a strong driving force behind the cohesion of the European Union.
Antagonism and compromise are facts of life.
However, the European Parliament must act within the bounds of government compromise and balance on the one hand, and the realistic utopia of European unification on the other.
There are issues such as technology, research etc. which are in dire need of a convergence strategy - this applies to the defence industry, information technology, space technologies and research.
And, as it strengthens its democratic institutions, Europe also needs to consolidate its economic and social power and cohesion, its strategic potential to act as a force of peace and its technological edge.
It is about time Europe had its own Cape Canaveral, its own ÍÁSÁ and its own Silicon Valley.
I welcome this opportunity to say a few words on the military and indeed civilian facility particularly with the forthcoming Nice Summit.
I would also like to put on record my appreciation of the first Minister of Defence to address the European Parliament.
It is indeed an historic occasion.
One of the most important things that was emphasised here this evening was said by Commissioner Patten earlier on in the evening, when he emphasised that we are talking about military facility and not an EU army.
I do not think that we can underline that sufficiently.
Even some of our literature that has been circulated with reports on our discussions here tonight, talks about rapid reaction forces instead of a rapid reaction facility, for example.
I think if we could clearly understand that, then a lot of the concerns might indeed evaporate.
What a pity, I say to my colleagues Van Orden and others, because my colleagues just across the pond, the Irish Sea, have so much to offer in this area: the tradition, the experience and the practice.
Maybe when the election is over we will get a more balanced debate.
They have so much to offer.
I am just disappointed with the line they are taking on it.
I will say no more.
I am very proud however of the Irish agreement and the Irish contribution.
As a small nation that has been traditionally "neutral", I am delighted we are in there at the table and doing what we can, given the mandate of the Irish people.
There is no nation in Europe that is philosophically neutral.
There are some nations that are militarily neutral and there is a difference.
Ireland has never been philosophically neutral.
We have a very strong view on the atrocities and the lack of human rights in some parts of the world and we are not slow to state that.
We have a very strong view of what we can contribute in peacekeeping and in peace-enforcing, and I hope we will always be able to contribute to that.
We will never be philosophically neutral nor should that ever be confused with military neutrality.
Thank you very much, Mrs Doyle.
The first attendance in our Parliament of a Minister of Defence is such an historic event that we have reserved the evening sitting for it so that our Members are not overwhelmed by the experience.
Mr President, I wish, first of all, to congratulate the two authors of the reports that we are now discussing, especially my colleague, Catherine Lalumière.
In the last few weeks the media have focused, as we in Parliament are doing today, on issues concerning European foreign and defence policy.
I am referring to the creation of a rapid reaction force and the transfer of WEU powers to the European Union.
It could be said that the public debate on these issues has broadened.
In addition to the diversity of opinions, I feel that there is a prevailing awareness that Europe is at an historic moment which requires its role in the international system to be clarified.
The perception of the importance attached by the European public to the common foreign and security policy is, in fact, borne out by the recent findings of Eurobarometer.
Although we all agree that priority should be given to conflict prevention and to the devastating effects of other types of disaster, the European Union will only be taken seriously if it also provides itself with military support capabilities for humanitarian interventions.
The progress that we are making in this field must, however, make us extremely thorough.
Greater clarification and definition are needed at every stage of the creation of common instruments for military defence, from the methods of participation to command, and in the responsibilities that should be given to the various countries.
We must ensure that this whole process is democratically monitored.
The European Parliament, working together with the national parliaments, is, in my opinion, the most appropriate body for this task.
I would like the Minister to comment on this point, if he can.
Mr President, in this debate in which we are discussing all the problems in the world and in which everyone speaks on whatever subject they like, I have taken the floor to speak about Afghanistan.
I would like to start by expressing my satisfaction at the fact that my amendment, which seeks to highlight the total failure of the United Nations drug control programme in Afghanistan, was adopted in the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy, and that it is now part of the text which is to be put to the vote tomorrow.
Millions of dollars were promised and then given to the Taliban to enable them to remove, to pull up their opium crops: they pocketed the money and then promptly more than doubled their drugs production.
The fault lies with the person who appropriated the funds, who should not have been so naive - and in this regard I am sorry to say that the programme and the agency were headed by an Italian - but also with the Taliban for their irresponsibility, and it is therefore right to condemn them, as the resolution indeed does.
However, I wonder whether it would not have been possible to be harder and harsher in our criticism and even threaten to impose sanctions on the country which gives the regime the greatest support, support without which the Taliban regime would crumble, namely Pakistan.
Why is Pakistan supporting the Taliban?
For various reasons, not least in order to unleash them on Kashmir once they have conquered the whole of Afghanistan, so that they will create anti-Indian hostility there once again.
Well then, in my opinion, it is extremely important to break this vicious circle, and we can only hope that the resolution will contribute to doing so.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to thank Mrs Lalumière for a very erudite report.
I want to focus on two matters. The Union' s management of civil crises has not progressed; the conflicts are by nature social, economic, intellectual, ecological and ethnic.
In all of these, preventive civil crisis management is a better approach than the military option.
My fear is that a rapid armed reaction force will be used more and more often instead of civil crisis management, and more and more rapidly.
The European flag is not to be promoted by means of a tank but by social equality, and therein lies a difference of principle.
I suggest that we organise as effective a rapid reaction civil crisis management centre as has now been planned.
Then we will be acting in accordance with priorities and our own philosophy.
My other fear is the involvement of states in NATO that do not wish to be involved.
There is one solution that might make the situation easier here: involving Russia in crisis management.
It is likely that Russia will often be either party to or otherwise connected with the crises we will one day have to face.
It is also known that President Putin does not take a categorically negative view of these crisis management forces, which I think means there are opportunities for cooperation, and when we know what type of crises we are dealing with, this for me would be an additional factor in achieving a balance in the process as a whole.
It would also make it easier for the nations of Europe to understand the whole issue.
I warmly welcome last week's decision by the EU Defence and Foreign Ministers to establish a 60,000 strong Rapid Reaction Force.
I am particularly pleased that the Irish Government is fully committed to this initiative and has pledged that 850 members of our defence forces will participate.
Like my Fine Gael colleague, Mrs Doyle, I recognise that this does not represent the creation of a European army and before shrill voices are raised in my own country, which there will be, against Irish involvement, I would point out that participation is voluntary and on a case by case basis.
Let me say this and let me respond to the comments of my other colleague Mr Van Orden.
I believe that this latest venture is a very important first step to remedy the deficiencies in EU defence capabilities, which were so cruelly exposed in Bosnia-Herzegovina and also Kosovo.
I believe that the lessons we learn in this latest development will serve us well in the future as we come to terms with the need to establish a European defence policy and capability, which in my view is as much an essential component of European integration as is the single currency.
This experience will provide us with the opportunity to develop our own policies in such a way, despite Mr Van Orden's fears, that we do not unnecessarily antagonise our US allies or cause stresses and strains within NATO itself.
EU policy must always be based on the partnership approach which seeks to share NATO assets, particularly planning and intelligence as well as hardware, rather than duplicate the structures of NATO, particularly when we share common objectives.
I believe this experience will serve the EU well when we come to develop our own defence policy, and I sincerely hope that that will come sooner rather than later.
Mr President, Paragraph 31 of Mr Brok' s report on the common foreign and security policy highlights the following message: '[The European Parliament] stresses the need, for the democratic legitimacy of Russia, given its political union with Belarus, that Russia's president and government unequivocally reiterate the strong need for democratic reforms in Belarus, particularly in the light of the report delivered in Minsk on 16 October 2000 by the parliamentary troika from the European Union, the Council of Europe and the OSCE.'
I am the author of that amendment, backed by a broad majority of the European Parliament' s Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy.
Does Russia, in the long term, want to be in political union with a non-democratic régime?
I also want specifically to name four people who have disappeared without trace in Belarus in the course of the years 1998-2000, together with a politician who died in obscure circumstances. These people are: Jurij Zaharenko, former Minister of the Interior and Vice-President of Belarus' s 13th Supreme Soviet;
Mr Krasovskij, friend of Vice-President Gonchar, who has disappeared with him; Dmitrij Zavadskij, a film maker for Russian TV who disappeared in mysterious circumstances from Minsk Airport on 7 July of this year; and, finally, Jurij Karpenko, leader of the Civil Party and former Mayor of Molodechno, who died suddenly and in obscure circumstances in August 1999.
I would ask Mr Patten and Mr Solana, together with the incoming Swedish Presidency, to take vigorous joint action against Belarus' s anti-democratic régime.
Mr President, first of all I want to thank you for your concern regarding the length of this part-session, but as you know I have been a parliamentarian for 21 years now, so I am impervious to ups and downs of this kind.
I would just add a few words to the comments on Afghanistan and say that the Council is determined to provide humanitarian aid on the ground so long as operational conditions allow it.
I shall then make a few remarks on, obviously, only a few aspects of the very comprehensive debate we have just held on the reports by Mr Brok and Mrs Lalumière, the broad lines of which, I believe, were largely endorsed.
This, of course, encourages the governments in the work they are doing and will, I think, support the Nice Council.
Let me start with the question of the position of defence capabilities within the European Union's spectrum of political and practical instruments.
As many speakers have said, among the means at the European Union's disposal, military means must be used only by last resort.
Obviously I must emphasise this principle, which is the one the governments uphold.
But what does "by last resort" mean?
It means when everything else has failed and that is the only option.
We saw this happen in Europe two years ago, and in Kosovo a year and a half ago.
All the political and diplomatic efforts, all the economic pressure, could not prevent the outbreak of violence in the heart of Europe and the unacceptable challenge that posed to all our European values.
So armed force is certainly a last resort.
But if we want it to prevent the unacceptable, it must be reliable and credible.
I also think that the European Union has the specific ability to combine these various instruments and that what we must do, if this policy progresses and becomes consolidated, is to develop a genuine European culture of conflict prevention and management.
We have learned from past experience and are still learning, especially in the Balkans, that thanks to their historical experience, with all the many conflicts, thanks to their understanding of the subtle and at times tough nature of confrontations between communities, the Europeans can develop a savoir-faire and methods of conflict management that are worthy of it and worthy of respect.
On the question of duplication, let me point out that the resources, the military assets the nations have freely accepted to provide for this joint force, are the same capabilities most of these nations make available to the Atlantic Alliance.
There is no duplication of forces.
They are the same forces, with the same level of preparation and readiness that most of our nations have - of course I belong to one of the nations that is not a member of the Alliance.
But in regard to all those nations that are members of the Atlantic Alliance, there is no duplication in their defence effort between forces to provide support for the Alliance's activities and forces that could be made available to the European Union.
On the question of the concept: this concept was adopted in 1992.
It relates to the Petersberg tasks.
They are enshrined in an agreement between European governments, which provides lines of conduct that are, in my view, well-tried and very broadly endorsed by European public opinion.
Any action that had to be taken would obviously have to be decided by the governments on a basis of consensus, and as several speakers said, if we emphasise in the declarations that we are not talking about a European army, that means that clearly there is no authority superior to the nations that could force them to commit their forces to any operation whatsoever.
So Europe is not about to form a new alliance as some people, who are not, I believe, fully informed, have suggested.
It will operate on the basis of national decisions taken in the framework of intergovernmental cooperation under the control of the national parliaments, in respect for the Petersberg tasks and in compliance, as we have also said in our declarations, with the principles of the United Nations Charter.
I believe that the European security and defence policy will move in the direction of providing an additional capability, practical support for the role of the United Nations, which is to resolve conflicts, including cases where the belligerents have to be kept apart.
That is my reply to a comment made by one speaker to the effect that the United Kingdom and France concluded an agreement in Saint Malo that would restrict the European Parliament's rights.
That is not what it was about.
The agreement reached in Saint Malo, which was primarily an agreement between the fifteen nations, was that if they wanted Europe to have a practical, effective capacity for action in the defence field, this could only be achieved on an intergovernmental basis.
Let us not forget that for a period of 50 years we hesitated or failed to give the European Union the minimum capability it needed so as not just to be an impotent witness to crises or outbreaks of violence.
Today the only option we have is intergovernmental action.
That suits all our democratic nations because it preserves their ultimate right to decide on the use of force.
De facto, therefore, it is true that parliamentary control is largely the result of the nations choosing the intergovernmental option.
I would also note, by the way, that the positions adopted by the Council do not, and will not, include any EU budgetary commitment to finance military action of whatever kind.
Does that mean there can be no dialogue between the Council, representing the governments, and the European Parliament on defence and security?
I think this debate, which everyone has welcomed, is a first demonstration that the opposite is true.
I believe we will see a positive dialogue developing.
Why?
Because if we remain consistent with the decisions that have been taken, we will see a gradual rise in the European Union's level of responsibility, credibility and influence in crisis management.
We will stop being a mere commentator.
As a result, public opinion and our parliaments, including this one, will begin to give deeper political thought to the issues involved in resolving crises by a whole range of means, of which armed force is but one component.
And the nature of the principles and thoughts set out in the reports by Mr Brok and Mrs Lalumière already show and indeed foreshadow how useful these debates could be.
There will still be other forms of rapprochement to invent with the national parliaments, but at any rate one thing that is within our reach and that represents a turning point I believe we can all welcome, is the fact that the fifteen nations which make up this Union, which have already built a political reality that has a positive effect on the international balance of power, these fifteen nations have chosen to acquire the means to act jointly in cases where violence challenges our values.
They are doing so because they believe in our common values.
I see that as good news.
Thank you very much, Minister.
Pursuant to Rule 42(5) of the Rules of Procedure, I have received a motion for a resolution to end this debate.
The joint debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.00 a.m.
Reform of the Commission
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the resignation of the Commission in March 1999 highlighted the need to reform its structures and working methods.
The energetic reform exercise it is now undertaking must seek above all to restore public confidence.
The need for reform is beyond doubt and the Commission must become a first-class administration in the service of our political objective.
That is an essential condition for lending credibility to the construction of the European Union.
Following the reports by the independent experts, the Commission, at the initiative of Mr Kinnock, presented a White Paper proposing reforms to the way it functions.
Officially, our Parliament is consulted simply with a view to delivering an opinion, but Mr Kinnock assured us that our views would be taken very seriously in the Commission's further activities, in which we will be associated.
Given the scale of the task, four committees were involved and a hitherto unknown procedure was applied, in the form of four parallel reports.
Let me now welcome the work done with my PPE colleagues, Mr Pomés Ruiz, Mr Harbour and Mr Lamassoure.
So we decided on a method of looking at the entire issue, without any overlaps.
That method was respected and involved us in a major consultation process.
It enabled us to take a common approach, which respected each committee's terms of reference while seeking a real, underlying consistency among our reports.
However, I want to point out that the PSE considers it essential for the reform to respect the treaties in a very pragmatic way.
The cohesion between all the reform sectors should assure the people of Europe that the methods by which European integration is managed politically are clearly visible and truly transparent.
Obviously the modernisation of a structure as complex as the Commission requires diplomacy, patience and trust on the part of the various players, and particularly the staff.
That is why we want to ensure that this process is not imposed from above; we consider it crucial that all the staff are effectively associated in this whole process of modernisation.
Although it may be led from the top, the reform must be clear and visible to the unions, to all the staff, who must be effectively associated in this whole process.
We are firmly resolved to give a new dynamism to the European civil service, but that means we must respect certain principles: the European civil service must continue to be governed by a single set of interinstitutional Staff Regulations, which ensure that every official is recruited at the same basic grade and provide for real mobility, access to real training.
The recruitment procedure must always guarantee equal opportunities to all EU nationals.
The Committee on Budget's opinion on the reform concentrates on these major aspects, in line with our powers and responsibilities.
The leitmotif is the systematic reminder that, parallel to any legislative procedure, all budgetary decisions must be taken in the framework of the related annual procedures and the Interinstitutional Agreement.
Parliament has a great responsibility towards the citizens.
As an arm of the budgetary authority, it must ensure that public monies are properly used.
Moreover, over and above all other considerations, we will be even more careful in future to ensure that the Commission really does spend the adopted budget on implementing the various political priorities our Parliament has democratically decided, rather than reallocating it on the basis of functional weaknesses.
The package of measures proposed in the White Paper must help modernise the whole way the Commission functions and make it more efficient.
We will support it and ensure that these procedures lead, as soon as possible, to a management culture geared to results and performance criteria, taking account of the cost-benefit ratio but also of our political priorities, and remembering that decentralisation and delegation of authority are essential tools, provided that power of decision and of supervision are guaranteed.
The communication from the European Commission must deliver a common message to the various institutions.
In concrete terms, it is crucial to review the procedures for honouring the budget votes.
The non-execution of the budget, the excessive delay between inclusion in the budget and commitment, and then the payment of appropriations, is a caricature.
It is extremely urgent to find ad hoc procedures to restore credibility to the Commission's activities.
That means we must review the procedures and fix realistic objectives so that the backlog can be cleared rapidly and the delay between commitments and payments, which undermines the credibility of a large part of the budget, can be reduced. We must also provide for the suspension of contracts if there is no longer any consistency between budget appropriations and political commitments, and for paying subsidies and commitments at an early date.
The credibility of the Commission, and therefore of the European Union, depends on its ability to reform its financial management systems very quickly.
In the medium term, it is essential to fine-tune the budgetary procedures and ensure closer consultation between the budgetary authority and the Commission at the beginning of each financial year.
That will avoid our plunging into the great difficulties we experienced in November and December and into situations that do not enable Parliament's political expectations to be translated correctly or allow for the real modernisation of the functioning of the Commission.
An annual evaluation of the changes in the functioning of the Commission and of the additional cost of this reform requires consultation at the beginning of each financial year.
That measure will take time, but it is inevitable and crucial to the reform.
The introduction of global management by project must be accompanied by a new nomenclature to ensure transparent management.
We are very much in favour of that.
We will make sure that all the technical provisions can be implemented on the basis of full respect for Parliament's rights as an arm of the budgetary authority.
Our committee was very pleased to see the conclusions of the Bourlanges report on externalisation taken up in the Letter of Amendment.
However, in regard to commitology, the Member States all too often promote national interests that are at odds with those of the Community and consultation of their committees slows down the decision-making process and increases the cost.
So the reform must provide an opportunity to restrict their intervention solely to areas where no expenditure is involved.
I shall not dwell on the question of human resources since Mr Harbour has addressed it.
The Commission's human resources are obviously not up to the new tasks entrusted to it, in addition to those it will have to assume in the future, and the redeployment proposed in the Letter of Amendment, which only relates to 4% of staff, will not resolve the human resources problem either.
In accepting the substance of the Letter of Amendment during the budgetary consultation procedure last Thursday, the Council proved that the other arm of the budgetary authority did in fact wish to support the reform of our Commission.
The questions of audit, management and financial control are basically dealt with in Mr Pomés Ruiz's report.
The Commission's position on the recasting of the Financial Regulation has been known since 22 November.
We expressed our views on the reform of the fast-track procedure in the vote on the van Hulten report.
Yet we would point out again that it is absolutely vital to guarantee independent financial control.
Moreover, it is totally illogical for the Council alone to be able to amend the Financial Regulation and we repeat our call for conciliation on this issue.
The reform of the Commission is crucial to the future of our institutions.
The working method chosen by the Conference of Presidents, which some found rather risky, took time.
But looking at the four reports as a whole, this period of consultation has allowed us to take both a broader and a closer view, which has increased the value of Parliament's opinion.
This report looks at the very first steps in the reform of the Commission, a major project aimed at the genuinely modern management of the Union.
It will be followed by many other reports and, for my part, after these weeks of working together, I hope we adhere to this method in future too.
I want to give particular thanks to the other three rapporteurs, for I really appreciated the way we worked and the clarity of their positions.
The differences of view that emerged are not just political but more a reflection of the cultural differences between the Fifteen.
They show that the very different approaches to the management of the public service we see every day in the different EU institutions, as also in our political groups.
The implementation of this reform clearly reflects the difficulties we are facing, but we know that this exercise, however difficult, is a vital one.
Together, we have contributed to this first stage that is crucial for the political future of the Union; we have modernised its management to make it more transparent and therefore bring it closer to our citizens, so as to convince them more firmly that their only future lies in a stronger European Union.
Mr President, it is a special pleasure for me finally, and I emphasis the word finally, to be here tonight presenting this report.
I recall that I first met Vice-President Kinnock in December last year when the parliament intimated that I was to be asked to take on this task.
So it has taken eleven months before we have moved forward.
It has been a very pleasurable experience.
Certainly I echo what colleagues have said that the team of rapporteurs have worked very well together.
It has been a pleasure to work together and I think the process of addressing a crucial reform of the Commission that is central to the future of the European Union has had added depth and richness because the four of us have been involved.
The focus of my report is on the strategy for the human resource reforms.
I emphasis strategy because the Legal Affairs Committee has perhaps at least two years work ahead of it, although we hope not quite as long as that, in scrutinising all the reforms of the Staff Regulations that will flow from the human resource reforms.
So we were keen to make sure that the strategic framework was in place and that it was the right one.
Generally we are satisfied with that, but we are not complacent about it and I just want to highlight what I think are some of the crucial issues that the Commission is facing and how we can help them achieve this absolutely critical reform.
One of the things that we were keen to do in our committee was not just to look at this in isolation but to look at what was going on outside.
We held a very successful public hearing on the reforms where we brought in people from private and public industry to give us the environment, the organisational and human resource changes that are going on around us, in which the Commission is going to have to move forward with these reforms.
Indeed it is going to have to recruit the best people in a very competitive market.
What was very interesting from those discussions was to see how employment and organisation practices in private and public sector are actually moving closer together.
Big organisations everywhere now are becoming more open; they are becoming more transparent; they are using information technology in new ways; they are moving away from traditional vertical forms of organisation, sharing information across organisations and between each other.
That is the crucial lesson that the Commission is going to have to take up in the details of its reform.
In the short time this evening I do not have time to go through all our specific recommendations in detail, so I want to centre on what I think is the key element of how these reforms must move forward.
We must develop an organisation within the Commission that is going to centre around giving every official clear objectives, giving them the right resources to deliver those objectives.
That includes the all important financial resources, as both Ms Guy-Quint and Mr Pomés Ruiz have emphasised, and empowering them to use those resources accordingly.
They must be given goals to be measured against, but also rewarded in terms of salary and promotion depending on how well they meet those goals.
That is the core of what we are trying to do here.
Those people who progress through the organisation will do so in a structured way with better career planning.
They may expect to move to other European institutions, to be seconded to national governments, or to work in the private sector.
That should become the norm, part of a standard career in the European Commission.
They would also expect during that career to meet with people who are coming in from outside: on a short-term contract; a specialist, a young person who sees three or four or five years working in the Commission as part of a career plan.
We should be encouraging those people alongside the structured career plan of the permanent service in the Commission.
We expect all this in a modern organisation in future.
The strategy is right but the details have to be right as well to really succeed.
In managing an organisation it is all very well having the rules and regulations in place but there are so many other crucial ingredients: the attitude of the staff, their commitment and support for the plans and their willingness to change.
All of those will be crucial and the involvement of everybody, whether in trade unions or not, will also be absolutely essential.
Leadership from the top will be crucial.
Vice-President Kinnock has tremendous enthusiasm for everything he does.
He has led this process very enthusiastically, but it has to be led from the very top.
I was pleased that all four of us had the opportunity to meet President Prodi recently.
He assured us that he also gave these reforms his full backing.
From the top all of these reforms must cascade down as quickly as possible to give the European Union the powerful Commission that it really needs to deliver its objectives over the next 20 years.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, despite its scope the contents of the White Paper presented by Mr Kinnock do not directly raise any institutional topics.
It does, however, constitute the first stage of a wider discussion launched by Commission President Prodi himself, concerning what is called the governance of the Union.
A further document on the subject is being prepared by the Commission.
It is in that spirit, in order to start the debate immediately, that our Committee on Constitutional Affairs, following the other three committees consulted, looked at the question of the Commission's political effectiveness.
Is the Commission able today to carry out the tasks and, in addition, the political role which fall to it under the Treaties?
Indeed, in a Europe which will have 30 Member States tomorrow, with a bloated Council and a 700-member, 20-language Parliament, the Commission will have a more important role than ever to play in defining and upholding the common European interest.
Accordingly, our committee repeats its attachment to a strong, independent, effective, transparent and politically answerable Commission.
To guarantee that it has these qualities, we insist on five points.
One: the spirit of good governance must not be confined to the Commission's management tasks.
It must also underpin its function of proposing legislation, for instance by devising an internal procedure which will ensure that the subsidiarity principle is respected and by keeping a chronological record of procedures in order to reduce excessive delays in the preparation of documents.
Second important point: the Commission is the only institution that can coordinate all the activities relating to the preparation and follow-up of European decisions.
Where it does not do so, the results are felt, as we have seen, especially in the second and third pillars.
So we call on the Member States to give the Commission the main role in the preparation for and follow-up to meetings of the European Council and of the Council of Ministers in all its forms, which can be done without formally modifying the institutions.
On the other hand, it is not up to the Commission itself to manage the implementation of the European policies or of the corresponding appropriations.
The White Paper points out that at present about half the Commission staff is assigned to management tasks.
That is too few if we consider that the Commission should manage itself.
It is far too many if we think it should offload most of these management tasks, which is our view.
Decentralisation must be the rule, in favour of the national administrations or external agencies.
Regarding these agencies, the three institutions should take the deliberations on governance as an opportunity to establish a common doctrine on what is called externalisation.
The establishment of independent agencies is justified whenever a scientific or technical opinion is required or decentralised management seems better.
That was the case, for example, with the European Drugs Monitoring Centre.
It will be the case tomorrow for food security or air safety, but provided we avoid any dismembering of the Commission's political responsibility and ensure that the latter has the legal means to account to Parliament and the Council for the way in which the agencies perform their tasks.
Lastly, it is also time to look at the Union's external representation.
We discussed that during this afternoon's debate on the common foreign policy.
Here too we have reached the borderline between what aspects come under good governance and what may justify measures of institutional reform, questions that were raised by Commissioner Patten.
The Committee on Constitutional Affairs calls for an overall study into the problem of the Union's external representation both in dealing with third countries in international negotiations and in international bodies, and to consider the establishment of a common diplomatic service.
The debate on governance is thus launched.
We will continue it in spring on the basis of the Nice conclusions and the new Commission proposals.
Mr President, Commissioners, ladies and gentlemen, we would like to begin by thanking Mrs Guy-Quint in particular for seeking consensus throughout the process of drawing up her report.
As the Committee on Budgets we consider that the establishment of the budget by activities causes us problems because of the lack of visibility of expenditure and our desire to strengthen the powers of the European Parliament as a budgetary authority.
We have just come from a budgetary negotiation with the Council, as Mrs Guy-Quint is well aware, where the hardest thing has been to determine in a clearer and more precise way what the limits of budgetary power are for one party or another.
The Committee on Budgets considers that Parliament must not lose its control over the allocation of administrative appropriations.
Our fears are not greatly allayed by the fact that, when the establishment of the budget by activities is over, category 5 of the financial perspectives will disappear.
We are not speaking against these consequences, but in favour of safeguarding the budgetary powers of this Parliament.
Therefore, any tendency of the Commission reform to covertly remove from Parliament this ability to control administrative expenditure would create interinstitutional problems in the short term.
However, an approach that safeguards Parliament' s powers of control and decision-making with regard to expenditure in the current category 5 will guarantee that the Commission reform will be negotiated with no further problems.
With regard to the TAOs and the transitional period for their dismantling, my Group insists that the Commission should make the greatest possible effort to limit that transitional period.
We therefore ask the Commissioner: can the Commission guarantee a truly limited transitional period?
Finally, we must deal with the thorny issue of the proposal on early retirement.
We are awaiting a three-way dialogue to define this question, amongst others, before the final approval of the 2001 budget.
My group does not reject the idea of this proposal on early retirement being obligatory.
We believe that the lack of definition of the current proposal could create more problems than advantages and we have already received some indications of concern from various officials.
Nevertheless, we will give the Commission our vote of confidence so that it can give as much detail as possible about the scope of its proposal.
During the coming three-way dialogue, we hope to receive good news on many issues, including this one, as well as the lifting of the reserve in the category of new posts.
This would clearly indicate this Parliament' s goodwill in relation to moving ahead with this reform with the Commission.
Mr President, firstly, I would like to thank the four rapporteurs for their excellent work.
Improving EU administration is one of most important reforms of this parliamentary term.
The main objective of the reform of the Commission must be a reduction in bureaucracy, increased efficiency and an end to financial confusion.
This means simplifying ways of working, devolving power downwards, and a better definition of the power of decision.
The key to reform is to increase and emphasise the importance of personal responsibility.
People in positions of responsibility within the institutions must bear both the legal and financial responsibility for their decisions.
Emphasising the importance of personal responsibility requires, among other things, the swift reform of Staff Regulations.
The reform will require activity-based budgeting.
The managers of units and institutions must be given a certain amount of leeway in administration.
Attention should be mainly focused on results, rather than working practice.
Only then can the resources that are available be allocated most effectively.
An institution and its directors must have clear scope for the best possible administrative practices.
Bearing responsibility will mean ending the advance monitoring of financing.
If there is more than one decision-maker, nobody clearly bears the responsibility.
Administrative reform is particularly necessary to improve financial transactions in the European Union.
The same practice needs to be followed in the payment of EU bills as in the outside world.
The current three-month term is too long, let alone the fact that many payments are delayed for more than a year.
That is a shameful state of affairs when we consider that the EU itself is a champion of modernised business practice.
My group firmly supports administrative reform.
Mr President, my group, the Greens/European Free Alliance, also support the reform of the Commission as set out in the White Paper, and we urge its speedy implementation.
Time and again in today's debate on Nice, we heard that the EU is facing enormous challenges and that the enlargement of the EU to an eventual total of 27 or more Member States will test the resilience of the European institutions.
At the same time, however, the prestige of the European institutions has sunk to a new low in the eyes of the public, beset as they are between a lack of confidence on the one hand and the pressure generated by a growing number of problems on the other; by way of example, I need only name three of the most pressing problems at the present time - the oil crisis, climate change and BSE.
We urgently need reform of the institutions, the sort of reform that will rebuild confidence and enable the Union to act more effectively.
We need legitimacy, which is born of greater efficiency, activity-based management, the creation of a culture of accountability, greater transparency, user-friendly administrative services and decentralisation.
We can only endorse these aims that the Commission has set itself.
We do fear, however, that the required degree of courage is still lacking in certain areas.
Let me take the example of transparency.
The Commission made great promises about transparency when it took office.
Sadly, the reality of the situation is quite different, as is shown by the framework agreement with Parliament and the rules on access to information.
We can see that some ground still needs to be made up here, and we hope that the Commission will take a bolder approach to the transparency problem.
As for disciplinary procedures, pledges have been made here too, but no clear rules have been formulated so far, nor have we seen or heard any clear statements as to how such rules would be enforced, nor has the question of external agencies been conclusively resolved.
We are hoping for an unequivocal statement on this at an early date.
With regard to 'whistle-blowers', I should like to subscribe to Mr van Hulten's earlier remarks.
On this matter too, we should have welcomed a less diffident approach from the Commission and greater courage on its part to address this problem openly, because whistle-blowers, of course, contributed in no small measure to the fact that reform process was finally set in motion.
The implementation of the budget is another area in which the Commission - and Parliament too, for that matter - must consider in future what to do about the problem of backlogs, how to ensure that we start to address the question of budgetary commitments in the implementation of new programmes too, so that we do not always have this huge discrepancy between commitments and payments.
In the domain of personnel too, we in the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance - of all groups - had imagined that Parliament might have been more accommodating towards the Commission.
Indeed, we believe that the establishment of new posts has been very tentative; given the current tasks of the Commission and the forthcoming eastward enlargement, there will certainly be a need to increase the rate of staff recruitment in future.
But, as I have said, there has been a regrettable lack of support from Parliament.
The European Parliament needs to take a good look at itself here too.
In general, we consider the basic approach taken in the White Paper to be right and proper, and we hope that the Commission has staying power and further reserves of courage on which it can draw in the course of the implementation process.
Mr President, despite the effort made by the rapporteurs to support the Commission's work, the fact remains that a coherent, global response aimed at producing a governing policy in addition to merely improving the institution's administration system has not yet been given to the recommendations of the Committee of Independent Experts.
We take note of the fact that the Commission has endeavoured to introduce progressively a new budgetary nomenclature, but we would like to know when this process will be completed.
I would just like to point out that, according to the experts, under the current budgetary nomenclature most of the subsidies are in fact disguised contracts, which the Commission refuses to treat as such because transparency is ensured even less effectively by subsidies than by contracts.
I will not dwell on the recruitment procedures. The fact remains that the secrecy veiling these procedures is still incomprehensible.
As far as we are concerned, the only reform possible was put forward by the Socialist Group when it tabled 3 amendments to the Bösch report, which we discussed during the last part-session.
I will close by touching on the commitology.
According to the Committee of Independent Experts, the committees of the representatives of the Member States tend in practice to become a mechanism through which national interests are represented in the implementation of Community policies, sometimes to the point where they become a forum for dividing up the booty of Community funds.
In our opinion, on this issue, the Commission sees nothing, hears nothing and sometimes speaks in a whisper if at all.
With regard to the Commission reform, we feel that the disparity between declared goals and accomplished facts is clear.
Mr President, in his letter to the Romans, the apostle Paul exhorts his readers to allow themselves to be transformed by the renewing of their minds.
This process of transformation is necessary to be able to truly serve God and cannot be enforced by rules.
Although the reform of the Commission is not to be compared with Paul' s message, this Biblical precept contains an important lesson for the Commission: rules cannot enforce true obedience.
Commissioner Kinnock is trying, by changing and improving the rules, to give the Commission officials an enhanced sense of responsibility.
As sound as the intention behind the rules may be, ultimately it all revolves around the implementation of these rules.
The new rules must therefore be tested as to their feasibility.
At the deepest level, this reform process is about a change of attitude and behaviour on the part of the Commission and its officials.
This change of attitude should find expression in openness of government.
The reform plans still leave a lot to be desired on that score.
The proposed advisory service for financial irregularities will not only undermine OLAF' s openness, but also its work.
In view of its limited budget, the Commission will have to make choices in its task package.
We must choose between deepening or enlarging the Union.
The years to come will be dominated by the issue of enlargement.
It is therefore astounding that the rapporteurs Mrs Guy-Quint and Mr Pomés Ruiz completely pass over this and merely regard the reform process as a means of achieving European political integration.
I believe that the reform of the Commission should be seen in the context of enlargement, and that is what it must be guided by.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, with the plan to reform the Commission, we are progressing towards the new European institutions: new in that changes were made to the old institutions following the problems which arose during past management and on the basis of the lengthy, exhaustive and in many places complex report of the independent experts.
As in the case of anything new which changes established situations, care and precision are clearly necessary.
Those with legislative responsibility cannot, and must not, let themselves be influenced by emotion and must not accept proposals in toto which, although the product of brilliant minds, do not follow the principle of representativeness.
The experts, as such, are specialists, but the legislator cannot be either their obedient servant or another expert: he must hear, consult, reflect and then produce on his own initiative, or else he may as well give up politics and leave law-making to the experts.
We would point out that part of the reform, which was unwisely adopted in September last year in line with the experts' proposal, was then rejected by the Court of Justice.
The entire structure of the Commission, which is a fundamental institutional body of the Union's current system, implements European Union policy as willed by Parliament and the Council.
Parliament must succeed in reforming the appropriate and necessary parts of the Commission without undue influence from outside, in order indeed to guarantee efficiency and transparency but also to make those who work there more aware of themselves, of what they are, of what they do and for whom they work.
As I see it, there is no structure of greater importance or substance in the world: 15 nations, soon to become 20 or more, an entire continent; the most industrialised part of the globe thrives in the Union and, therefore, in the Commission through its structures.
The officials working in the Commission and Parliament must be top quality, aware of this and paid accordingly. They must work but they must also receive all the guarantees and prerogatives appropriate to their job.
They must be accountable but not subjected to humiliation. If we give due recognition to those who have to be good, hard workers in order to be here, we will achieve excellent institutions.
Otherwise, everything will regress and the same problems may well arise as in the past, those very problems which have prompted us to carry out these reforms.
Mr President, can I start off by acknowledging Mr Harbour and the work he has put in to his report.
Like Mr Van Hulten I commend the way he worked with other people and was prepared to take on ideas and submissions from other political groups.
At the same time I thank the Commission and its staff for their support and assistance.
The Harbour report is really only the broad framework, it is basically the bones.
There is still a lot to be done, and I believe that Parliament cannot rest on its laurels.
We have already heard that the Commissioner earlier today launched a series of papers on individual aspects of the report.
Parliament, I understand, will not officially be considering these.
This is a mistake.
For what happens in staff reform in the Commission will ultimately have repercussions for the Parliament and we should not forget that.
I would like to pick up on the some 26 amendments which have been made to the Harbour report.
As you would expect we are supporting Amendments Nos 1 to 6, submitted by the PSE.
We shall however be withdrawing Amendment No 6 and asking for a split vote on the latter part of Amendment No 15 as we do not believe the current system within the ECB lends itself to this situation.
We would ask that Amendments Nos 20 and 23 be taken as additions, as in Paragraph 10 it would be utter folly to delete the involvement in drawing up the job goals and the personnel development role of the appraisal system.
Amendment No 23 looks like it was an afterthought and while we are not against it, it should not replace the existing Paragraph 22.
We are supporting Amendments Nos 13, 14, 16 and 9 submitted by the PPE.
We are opposing the rest of the amendments as they either add nothing to the report or basically take us off into flights of fantasy.
I would like to say something quickly about change.
Change is never easy.
Many people are resistant to change because of the fear of taking that step into the unknown.
Can I say that as someone who has been an employee of an organisation which downsized without any consultation with the existing staff, I envy the Commission staff.
Can I also say as someone who has been of another organisation who went through a downsizing and was made redundant, I am more than envious of the Commission staff and the way they are working and the Commissioner working with them.
It is not easy being made redundant.
I wish I had been offered the chance of retraining for another job within that organisation.
I want initially to pay credit to Mr Harbour.
I recall what he said about the long gestation period of this work and I would encourage the Commission not to feel that the timetable is an indefinite one.
There has been a vacuum and I would encourage the Commission to feel that its restored sense of self-confidence is important to us here in the Parliament and more importantly to the peoples of Europe.
Could I now draw attention to what Mr Lamassoure said in his explanatory statement about the institutional role of the Commission and particularly the political initiative.
I do not often agree with my colleague Mr Van Dam who sits with me on the Estonian delegation.
But he said two things I do accept, one that an attitudinal change was necessary and two, that enlargement is a key factor in the future success of the Commission.
Mr Lamassoure says on enlargement that the Commission, as regards the accession process, is expected to propose a comprehensive strategy reflecting the Union's interest in its political timetable - not just an assessment regarding the suitability of each applicant country.
When I was previously in this Parliament, the President of the Commission was Jacques Delors and he worked alongside Commissioner Brittan and before him Commissioner Cockfield.
They did not wait for ideas to be handed down from the Council of Ministers.
They themselves devised the single market programme. They worked hand-in-hand with the Parliament throughout.
They promoted the scheme and they achieved it.
There was a sense of great self-confidence and harmony between the institutions.
I would simply say to Commissioner Kinnock, and I am sure he needs no encouragement in this, that it is not just a question of management or technical detail, it is a question of personnel and belief in what you are doing and belief that the Parliament will work alongside the Commission.
We must have a goal.
That goal is enlargement and it is extremely difficult to achieve but we look to the Commission to be the driving force and we want to work alongside it.
Mr President, all administrations need to be reviewed periodically and to be modified and brought up to date.
Consequently, our Group supports the Commission' s proposals - the White Paper - promoted by Commissioner Kinnock.
Mr Harbour' s report views these proposals positively and we also support that report, which has been approved by the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market.
However, while doing so, the Socialist Group considers that the current functioning of the Community' s public administration is reasonably efficient.
We must remember that the crisis in the Commission was not caused by any failing in the Community' s administration but by political problems which had little to do with the functioning of the administration, and any desire to link the crisis in the Commission with the malfunctioning of its administration would be arbitrary.
We must bear in mind that the Community administration is based on certain principles, which are well established in continental administration, such as the principle of a job for life and stable employment.
These principles were established after a previous period in which public appointments resulted from the distribution of influences, from the system of cherry picking and string pulling.
In light of this, the system of stable public administration offered a guarantee that political changes would not affect the functioning of the administration.
In some countries, such as Spain, where our political life has been through tempestuous times, the administration, at least, has been a guarantee of stability.
Therefore, while recognising that it is necessary to modernise the administration, our concern is to guarantee those fundamental principles of Community administration, which is currently occupied by extremely competent officials, who, often at great personal sacrifice, have to move home in order to set up in Brussels and who receive remuneration which is appropriate to the efforts that this entails.
We feel sure that the Commission will continue to present concrete proposals.
We believe that we will have the opportunity to express our opinions on them and that throughout this time we will be able to help the Commission in developing the Community civil service.
However, we feel that we ought to respect two fundamental principles; one, the recognition of situations that are recognised in law; the so-called acquired rights of officials and secondly, the principle of stability, of guarantee, and even the right to union membership, the right to the defence, by officials, of their post, their career and even their professional prestige.
With this consideration, we urge the Commission and Mr Kinnock to move ahead with their efforts at reform.
Mr President, Commissioners, ladies and gentlemen, we are monitoring this reform with justifiably high expectations.
I regret the fact that it took the resignation of the Commission in March 1999, due to dubious practices and maladministration, to initiate this reform.
The European public' s confidence was shaken and it is much more difficult to regain this now.
The Commission' s problems in implementing various programmes are clear to see.
Delays in payment are mounting up and the bureaucratic obstacles are well known.
The Commission' s new duties have multiplied, the complexity and the slowness of its procedures have grown worse and its structures, methods and formal constraints have not changed.
We are all familiar with the consequences of this situation and it has tested the dedication and skill of the many people working in the Commission and in its administration.
It is crucial that the Commission makes the best use of existing human resources and promotes new recruitment.
This is not enough, however, to improve the implementation of actions and of available appropriations.
We hope to see a thorough reorganisation of structures and working methods, and clarification of the distribution of powers between Parliament, the Council and the Commission is essential.
The first two institutions are responsible for defining policies and priorities and making financial resources available. The Commission is responsible for ensuring that all the conditions are met in order to implement the financial management of Community programmes.
With regard to this last aspect, the executive role of the Commission must be strengthened, above all, by a reform of commitology.
Let us be clear on this matter: if, under the terms of Article 274 of the Treaty, the Commission alone is responsible for implementing the budget, then some interventions by Member States through management and regulatory committees, which have basically been put forward to express national interests, must be seen as hampering the Commission's ability to manage efficiently.
This is what also needs to be changed in the procedure known as commitology.
I am sure of the success of this reform and therefore congratulate the four rapporteurs, especially Mrs Guy­Quint, whose work I have followed most closely.
Mr President, the resignation of the Commission in the spring of 1999 was in fact the dénouement of a much more deep-seated problem within the European Commission, namely vague working structures that resulted in a lack of political accountability, fragmented policy priorities and unsatisfactory results.
Commissioner Kinnock' s White Paper offers a solution to these problems but also goes much further in that the reform proposals are founded on the basic principles of a modern European public service.
The people of Europe should be the main concern of a service of this kind, and for their part, they simply expect to see results and appropriate action when their interests are at issue.
Issues such as the BSE crisis, oil prices, and the greenhouse effect have a distinctly European dimension.
So the Commission has an important task to fulfil in this respect.
It will only be possible to achieve results for the citizens if the Commission is able to act swiftly and transparently, and be accountable to this public service, among other things.
So this is what the goal of the reforms taking place within the Commission must be.
We have all seen how the culture of fear has rather paralysed - totally paralysed I might say - the decision-making processes within the Commission, and by that I also mean the departments and the officials.
The field of external relations, for example, exemplifies the major problems that the Commission is unfortunately still struggling with.
Many thousands of project applications have been awaiting assessment for over a year now.
Letters and requests for information as to the state of play are either dealt with half-heartedly or not at all.
Situations of this kind have severely eroded the confidence of the citizens and organisations concerned.
That being the case, Commissioner Kinnock' s proposed transition to efficiency and supervised management and budget deserves all the support it can get.
The Commission could then concentrate on its core tasks and dramatically improve its efficiency.
At the same time, the package of reform proposals could break through this culture of fear, restoring the officials' faith in themselves as an organisation, because there are a lot of good people there.
The European Parliament could then judge the Commission on its results, with the political priorities established by Parliament and the Council, but also, in fact, the emphasis on service provision for the people of the EU, forming the all-important framework for assessment.
It is essential to quickly win back the credibility of the European public service in the eyes of the public.
This cannot be achieved by over-emphasising the word 'internal' in the reforms.
The public must also be able to feel that the Commission is truly accessible and transparent.
The White Paper on European governance that came out recently, contains a whole host of worthwhile initiatives to this end, but there is still a great deal to be done in other areas.
I have in mind the people' s access to documents, an issue that we have yet to be satisfied on.
Now is the time to close the chapter on fraud, bureaucracy and the fall of the Commission once and for all.
Let us open a new book on a modern European public service that fulfils its constitutional role in the proper manner, is ready for the forthcoming enlargement and lastly, which embraces service provision for the European public as its new mission statement.
Commissioner Kinnock and President Prodi will receive the full support of the socialist group, which also means that we will keep an ever-watchful eye on the results and criteria outlined so eloquently in the White Paper.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I am going to be very brief, but first I would like to congratulate all the rapporteurs.
The basic consensus with which they have worked is something to be greatly welcomed and is very encouraging.
The debate, as we have seen, is not so much about the principles, objectives and timeliness of the reform as about the procedures, pace, timetable, and possible shortcomings or unwanted consequences of its implementation.
This is a necessary reform because at the root of it was a real political crisis, not just the normal self-criticism which occurs in the course of an administration that has been in action for several decades.
However, what we are dealing with here is not a political reform with administrative consequences but an administrative reform with political consequences.
We are therefore dealing with one of those challenges that are occasionally faced by politicians who must find the best way to safeguard the governability of institutions, as well as the best way to provide the citizens with a good administration.
The success of the reform will be a success for all of us and we all have a great deal at stake here.
This being the case, it seems to me not only appropriate but also necessary to explore all the possibilities offered by interinstitutional dialogue.
This dialogue must open up the basic legislative framework of Community finances to the codecision procedure.
This dialogue must allow the establishment of common mechanisms in human resources policies.
It must yield fruit in terms of multiannual budgetary agreements, within the framework of the Financial Perspectives and, finally, it must allow us to work jointly on the monitoring and control of the reform.
Ladies and gentlemen, I believe that the European public is not so much interested in our plans, in the sense of the material design of the reform, as in the intentions, that is to say, its objectives and consequences.
The public is going to judge us according to the degree of transparency, closeness in the decision-making responsibilities, coherence in the distribution of responsibilities, and according to the efficiency which is finally achieved.
I was reflecting on the very good point, amongst others, that Mr van Hulten made earlier on, seeking the explanation for the fact that the House, including myself, had the delight of listening to a lengthy foreign affairs debate earlier on.
The difference between the time given to that debate and the time given to this debate and the occasion on which they took place, I would point out to Mr van Hulten, is very simple to understand.
For the European Parliament, foreign affairs is a vital and interesting matter, and I completely agree that, having had a lifetime's interest myself in these issues, that is a proper explanation.
For the European Parliament, reform is a vital matter on which it has decisive effect as a budgetary authority and as a legislature.
That explains in politics why foreign affairs gets two hours and comes first and reform gets one hour and comes second.
The more power you have over an issue, the later it comes in the night.
Mr President, I am very grateful to you for the opportunity of this debate to respond to the excellent work of Parliament's four rapporteurs, the four musketeers, on the Commission's Reform White Paper.
It is also appropriate for me to provide an up-to-date picture of the latest progress with the implementation of our strategy for applying modernising changes and for preparing the further improvements, which we outlined in our strategy eight months ago.
I am very pleased that my colleague, Michaele Schreyer has been able to join us and naturally she will respond on the parts of the reports that relate particularly to her budget portfolio.
I would like to begin by reporting to the House that this morning's meeting of the College as Mr Van Hulten said earlier, adopted a proposal for an interinstitutional agreement establishing an advisory group on standards in public life, as outlined in Action 1 of the White Paper action programme.
It adopted a preliminary strategy for decentralisation and simplification of decision-making procedures - something which eventually will lead to substantial increases in Commission productivity and reducing those strata of bureaucracy that everybody rightly talks about.
The College also agreed today substantial proposals relating to the reform of human resources policy.
Those human resources policy documents relate to discipline, to whistle-blowing and to equal opportunities.
They will be the formal basis for the legally required consultation between the Commission, its staff and staff representatives, which of course will take place over the coming months.
Our approach on disciplinary procedure proposes several necessary changes, including the improvement and restructuring of the investigative phase of disciplinary proceedings, which would be handled by a specialist service.
They include: making the disciplinary board a permanent and more professional body, chaired by a qualified specialist from outside the Commission; improving the provisions governing the justified suspension of officials, including those being prosecuted in criminal cases in national courts; consolidating the vital coordination between the Commission and OLAF whilst not compromising the essential independence of OLAF; refining the list of possible sanctions to relate them better to any proven contravention of staff regulations.
All these proposals are focused on enabling the Commission and the other European institutions, including Parliament, to improve the professionalism, the consistency and the reasonable speed of disciplinary procedures and to do so without loss of fairness or rights of the accused.
The document on whistle-blowing proposes a system that compares well with the best existing practices in Member States.
It proposes the integration of the existing OLAF regulation reporting obligation into the body of the Staff Regulations.
It sets out the rights of career protection for whistle-blowers who report genuine concerns in a responsible way.
It establishes safeguards against frivolous or malicious reporting.
It emphasises the responsibility for those receiving reports of possible wrong-doing to act promptly, seriously and effectively.
It defines many clear procedures in several channels for reporting alleged wrong-doing inside and outside an official's employing institution.
In addition in the right to report to OLAF and to the hierarchy of his or her own institution, an official will also be entitled to report suspicions and evidence to the Presidents of the Council or this Parliament or the Commission or the Court of Auditors or the Ombudsman.
The provision of external channels will be a major and progressive change, which I am certain will work to the benefit of the institutions and their staff, the European Union and, of course, the public interest.
Finally, our equal opportunities document presents specific policy proposals to ensure equality of employment opportunity, so that the evident inequalities, which have been endured by women, by people from ethnic minorities and people with disabilities, can be addressed effectively without compromising standards of merit.
In these documents we have again sought to take examples from best practices in Member States.
To save time and to recognise portfolio relevance, I hope that the House will accept that it is best at this juncture to leave the salient issues raised in Madame Guy-Quint' s very thorough and very constructive report from the Budget Committee and also the financial management issues highlighted in the equally productive report by Mr Pomés Ruiz to my colleague Commissioner Schreyer.
With more time, naturally, I would be very happy to address the matters raised, and I am sure that there will be other opportunities.
For now, however, I will focus on just one of Mr Pomés Ruiz's points, one raised by other honourable Members in this debate, namely his question of why the Commission has not acted on the proposal made in a number of Budgetary Control Committee reports that there should be a separate chamber for disciplinary hearings for budgetary irregularities, either within the Court of Auditors or in the Court of Justice.
I think Mr Van Hulten made the point in the course of the debate again.
It is a fair question and there are basically two reasons for not taking up proposals that the Commission should have recourse to such external institutions.
First, the Committee of Independent Experts stipulated, in my view rightly, that any such body should be an internal one, not least because the Treaties attribute very specific roles to the other two institutions in controlling the financial implications and the legality of the Commission's disciplinary decisions.
It would create untenable conflicts of interest, not to say some constitutional gymnastics, if either Court were to be directly involved in the Commission's internal procedures.
In addition, such changes would obviously only be possible with amendment to the Treaties.
Secondly, in practical terms, dividing a disciplinary case up into its financial aspects and its other aspects of conduct, with these matters being heard in different institutions, would have the very undesirable effect of considerably lengthening the disciplinary procedure.
I hope that the House will agree that these reasons are sound, as the document on discipline this morning shows.
In most Member States and in all international organisations, the institution itself is responsible for disciplining its staff.
We strongly believe that should remain the case in all the European Union institutions.
Turning now to the governments and human resources issues of the reports from Mr Lamassoure and Mr Harbour, I regret greatly that time does not permit me on this occasion to make the detailed response, which these reports merit.
Suffice it to say at this juncture that I very much welcome both these reports.
I thank Mr Harbour for the very positive and thoughtful approach that he and his committee have taken to the complex issues of the modernisation of human resources policy, both in the Commission and in the other European institutions.
The report has given us additional and extremely useful bases for discussion in many of the relevant areas and the opportunity which was provided by the public hearing on human resources policy organised by Mr Harbour offered practices and perceptions from the public and private sectors which were all extremely instructive.
I would like to extend my thanks to Mr Lamassoure for his constructive insights and his constructive remarks on the constitutional context in which the current reform is being pursued.
He rightly draws attention to the broad issues and argues that it would have been valuable if the forthcoming governance White Paper could have preceded the proposals for administrative reform.
Ideally, of course, he is absolutely right.
I know, however, that he and other honourable Members understand that the political priority and the urgency necessarily given to the reform agenda meant that any delay in pursuing that agenda would not have been feasible or acceptable.
I am sure, however, that the analysis and the principles that will be set out in the Governance Paper next year will directly inform us, as we complete the design and begin the full implementation of reform and modernising changes over the next two years.
I express my gratitude to all honourable Members for their hard and thoughtful work on the reform issues undertaken over recent months.
I also thank them for the quality of the further contributions made in the course of tonight's debate and I am naturally glad to be able to say, with justification, that the hope that I expressed last year that the Commission and this Parliament would sustain an alliance for reform is proving to be absolutely realistic.
I thank the House for that too and for your patience this evening.
Thank you very much, Mr Vice-President.
I am sure that Parliament will give you the opportunity to go into greater depth on another occasion, since this reform is not going to end with the first vote tomorrow.
I am therefore sure that we will have the pleasure of hearing you in the future.
Mrs Schreyer has the floor to supplement the Commission' s report.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the reform of the Commission is a root-and-branch reform process.
That is evident from the White Paper, and I believe it is also very plainly evident from the parliamentary reports.
The main focal point of the reform is the effort to improve financial management.
This is not a matter of localised fine-tuning; no, the changes in this area are profound and substantive.
The best news is that major building blocks of the reform process are already in place.
They not only exist on paper but have also been implemented in practice.
Some building blocks are being chiselled out, while others still have to be approved in formal decisions of Parliament and the Council prior to implementation.
Allow me to deal now with important points from the reports by Mrs Guy-Quint and Mr Pomés Ruiz which relate directly to the budget process, namely the drafting of the budget and its implementation.
Both of these subjects are examined in the new version of the Financial Regulation.
The recast Financial Regulation is at the heart of the reform process.
The main aims of the new version are simplification, greater transparency and reinforcement of budgetary principles; in concrete terms, this means fewer exceptions to the rules, fewer incomprehensible special regimes and more efficient and effective budgetary procedures.
An entirely new feature of the Financial Regulation is the inclusion of rules such as those on the awarding of contracts and on financial aid.
In other words, the rules governing everyday budgetary operations have become clearer and will be easier to administer, which - as is our hope and our aim - will cut future error rates.
Mrs Guy-Quint, in your report you referred to many points in the new version of the Financial Regulation, but you also expressed concern that activity-based budgeting might deprive Parliament of information.
I believe I can allay this concern.
The idea underlying activity-based budgeting is actually to make it clear in the budget how much money is available for operational and necessary administrative expenditure in each policy area.
We want to indicate the cost of each policy, and you are right in saying that this does not in itself suffice for a cost-benefit analysis, but it does provide a general review of the funds available for a given policy area, and that is an innovation in the budget of the European Union.
The abolition of the present division of the budget into administrative and operating appropriations is the logical consequence of this new approach, but it does not mean that staff and administration costs are no longer identifiable, no longer separately labelled.
On the contrary, it goes without saying that they will continue to be shown in specific budget lines; they will simply be assigned to the appropriate area of political activity and will no longer lurk anonymously somewhere inside a general administrative budget for the Commission.
This activity-related approach is designed to harmonise resources more closely with political priorities.
It is an instrument with which expenditure can be more accurately estimated and recorded, and it is also a straightforward management tool which can channel managerial activity in a more focused manner on the basis of priorities.
It was, after all, one of the main concerns of this very Parliament that political priorities should be made more clearly identifiable.
So once again transparency is the aim, and I believe we shall achieve that aim.
Let me say briefly, Mr Garriga Polledo, that the categories used in the Financial Regulation have been retained.
The Regulation is a financial-planning instrument, and as such it has also been retained.
Incidentally, I am delighted to note, Mrs Guy-Quint, that you are a specialist in this field who can be relied upon to debate the recast Financial Regulation in Parliament with competence and no doubt with passion too.
I should like to deal with a point on which Mr Pomés Ruiz laid special emphasis in his report, namely the issue of payment targets.
You were right, Mr Pomés Ruiz, to emphasise this point so strongly.
Last year, only about two thirds of payments were made within the 60-day limit, and I agree with your criticism; this is unacceptable.
Admittedly, the number of financial transactions has risen rapidly in recent years, but that is no excuse.
It must become a matter of course for the Commission to pay invoices within the prescribed time limit, and this is the target the Commission has set itself.
How do we intend to achieve it?
I shall mention just a few of the many steps we are taking. For example, contract clauses on invoicing will be simplified, and the Commission will make greater use of flat-rate reimbursement.
For one thing, it is simply very uneconomical for the Commission if contracts operate in such a way that 20% of expenditure on item X is reimbursable, while 30% of expenditure on item Y is eligible for reimbursement, not to mention the frequent need for vouchers covering minimal items of expenditure to be collected and checked.
The instrument of flat-rate reimbursement saves a great deal of time and money.
Another important point is that the date on which the Commission receives an invoice should be clearly specified.
For that reason we shall establish a central register in which incoming invoices will be logged, and an entitlement to interest on late payments will be enshrined in the Financial Regulation and in the terms of our contracts.
I need hardly add that financial penalties are always a very potent and painful instrument.
On the subject of externalisation, may I briefly point out that the Commission will present a legal basis for this.
Moreover, in its letter amending the budget, the Commission also gives a detailed opinion on the question of the technical-assistance offices (TAOs), and I am very pleased to see that the ideas of the Commission and those of Parliament on the future treatment of this question run along the same lines.
Administrative reform is intended to improve the work of the Commission.
For this improvement we need good people, good staff, and we need a sufficient number of staff.
To that end, the Commission requested additional posts for next year from the budgetary authority, and I am delighted with the decisions that were taken last week in the framework of the conciliation procedure.
With these reforms the Commission is preparing itself to deal more effectively with its current tasks as well as with new tasks in the future, and it is also, of course, a reform process that will equip the Commission to discharge its new responsibilities in the framework of enlargement.
We shall naturally make every effort to implement the reforms as quickly as possible, even though there will be occasional criticism that one or other of these reforms still awaits completion.
In those situations it is sometimes forgotten that we also operate within a democratic system and that codecision rules have to be respected - and rightly so.
The staff of the Commission are also agents of the reform process, so it has to meet with their acceptance too.
It also has to be accepted by the other institutions, and in particular it needs the support of the elected representatives of the people.
For that support, whether critical or enthusiastic, may I express my sincere thanks to Parliament.
I see that we have evidently launched the reform process in good time, because it is not quite five to twelve yet!
Thank you very much, Commissioner.
The joint debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.00 a.m.
EU - LDC relations
The next item is the debate on the report (A5-0337/2000) by Mrs Sauquillo Pérez del Arco, on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation, on the effectiveness of relations between the European Union and the developing countries and the impact of reform of the Commission on these relations [2000/2051(INI)].
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, let me begin by emphasising the quality of Mrs Sauquillo's own-initiative report on the reform of the Commission and its impact on the effectiveness of the European Union's relations with the developing countries.
One of the great merits of this report is that it highlights the crucial need for the European Union and its Member States to conduct a large-scale development policy, which alone can reflect the culture and influence of our continent.
First let me remind you of a few statistics, to avoid any complexes about our current activities.
We must say it and repeat it: the European Union and its Member States provide more than half the public development aid. Contrary, therefore, to what is often assumed, the Community is committing itself more and more, in the strict sense of providing European aid.
Thirty years ago, it provided 7% of international aid; today the figure is 17%.
In 1990, total external aid from the European Union accounted for EUR 3 billion. Today, ten years later, the figure is nearly EUR 9 billion.
Of course this is not enough, but it should at least protect us from caricatures about our poor record of development aid.
Nonetheless, we have to remember one incontrovertible fact.
It is that some Member States pursue their own development policies alongside the European policy.
In my view we can improve the global situation if we take a pragmatic approach and try to coordinate the Member States' activities as closely as possible with those of the Community.
At that price, I believe, we can achieve complementarity.
In any case, that is in line with the declaration on regional policy of 10 November, an important Council and Commission policy.
It introduces a division of labour between the Commission and the Member States, on the basis of their comparative advantages.
In my view, we must beware of two equally dangerous traps: the gradual renationalisation of development aid on the one side, on the other a Utopian vision of the Commission as the sole player in the development aid field.
Nevertheless, the reform of the European Commission is moving in the right direction in proposing both more effective action by the Commission and giving more responsibility to the beneficiaries of the development projects.
Of course, as some speakers have pointed out, that raises the question of human resources, which have been inadequate until now.
I shall not dwell on that point.
Let me conclude by emphasising three amendments I tabled on behalf of the PPE Group, Amendments Nos 1, 2 and 4. The underlying idea is to turn the European Union into an active rather than passive partner in development aid, but also the concern to improve the use of the allocated funds.
The PPE Group will vote for Mrs Sauquillo's report, while hoping the amendments it has tabled can be incorporated.
Mr President, one in five people in the world has no access to basic social provisions.
Europe is a super power in economic terms and so it is absolutely right that we should be having this discussion subsequent to the debate on the White Paper.
It was an excellent idea of Mrs Sauquillo' s to include the part on external relations in the section on internal training, thereby making it an item on the agenda.
We have big problems.
The Commissioner has also referred to this in his texts: a huge backlog, lack of objectives, a culture of fear in the departments dealing with payments, and at the same time, far too low a level of project proposals, a great deal of time wasted and little in the way of efficient spending.
We want to work towards a culture of greater accountability.
We want to see ex-post control.
We want to see increased accountability for the public service and we want to see decentralisation.
We want to see a European development fund become integral to Parliament.
We want clearer objectives.
Parliament foresaw all this in terms of its role in the draft budget for 2001.
We will come back to that later because that in itself constitutes a sound framework.
We have our doubts about the technical mould in which the reforms are now being cast.
We think it is more important to have a clear distribution of political tasks: a Parliament with clear objectives, a Commission with a clear idea of what it wants, a Commissioner - and I fully support Mrs Sauquillo in this - who has hundred per cent responsibility for the whole world when it comes to development policy, and who is given full responsibility for this within the Commission, and also the human resources they need, because without these human resources it is of course absolutely impossible to implement this policy.
To briefly sum up: let us put an end to this culture of fear, also amongst the officials.
Let us build trust between our Parliament, the departments and the Commissioner so that Europe can deliver a different kind of message in a world of poverty.
Feyenoord was known as the football club of 'deeds, not words' .
May the Commissioner take this motto to heart.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I fully support Mrs Sauquillo's report, commending the hard work put in and the contribution it makes to the changes to the Committee on Development and Cooperation.
If, as is hoped in the explanatory statement, the reform brings about greater involvement of the European Parliament, we will have to establish a sort of policy which does not merely stop at money or budget headings, which, in practice, take the form of tangible aid to less developed countries.
Aid does not just mean donating money but providing practical assistance in times of difficulty or for things which they would not be able to do themselves or without assistance.
Poverty and need are not just the product of economic backwardness and development problems but are often the result of aggression and the exploitation of the weak by the strong, of the selfishness of the capable in the face of the weakness of the marginalised.
Before we start to talk about aid to projects, we should try to remove all the existing causes of exploitation, identifying and bringing to justice those who have exploited and abused peoples which are in a state of need.
The reformed Commission must establish a project, before dispensing aid, to investigate the causes which have created or contributed to creating a state of discomfort among the poor peoples.
We often talk about cancelling the debt of the less developed countries.
The phrase would lead us to believe that it is an act of altruism or great generosity but, when all is said and done, it may be merely an act of justice.
The Commission must also ensure that this happens at international level.
In this way, quality of life will improve and the gap between the poor, who are becoming increasingly poorer, and the very rich, who are exploiting these situations and becoming increasingly richer, will be lessened.
Mr President, I have today returned from Mozambique where the European Union has been responsible for brilliant humanitarian assistance following the flood disaster, but, once again reconstruction projects, where we have already allocated the money, are delayed while signatures in Brussels are awaited.
Reform of external assistance "yes" , sufficient staff numbers to manage projects "yes" , decentralisation to delegations "yes" , increased emphasis on programming, movement to ex post financial assessment, streamlined comitology arrangements "yes" , "yes" , "yes" .
Late at night, when we have to be clear, even blunt and when my esteemed colleague, Mrs Sauquillo Pérez del Arco, has had to use the instrument of an own-initiative report to ensure parliamentary accountability, the Commission should listen when European Parliament says "no" .
First, the emasculation of DG Development will deform not reform external assistance.
We want a single development directorate covering policy and implementation, covering trade and aid, covering Asia, Africa and Latin America, when the Commission still proposes to peel off these other policy areas, still proposes a hybrid with programming undertaken separately.
Second, we demand an end to the practice of draining external assistance away from developing countries towards the EU' s own borders in recent years.
The reform communication of 16 May does not once mention the word "poverty" nor does the General Affairs Council Resolution of 9 October.
We need to ensure the EU lives up to the promises made at the UN summits, that development is paramount, and to do so by guaranteeing a fixed percentage of external assistance to the world' s least developed countries.
Finally, we should understand that Mr Patten' s proposal for aid responsible to a board of Commissioner directors with Mr Nielson as Chief Executive is an unworkable gimmick borrowed from management text books and is fundamentally incompatible with the collegiate structure of the Commission itself.
It is precisely because Mr Nielson is loyal to that collegiate responsibility that he will doubtless defend the proposal tonight.
So I hope others in the Commission will hear us when we say we have a highly effective development Commissioner.
Let us give him the political responsibility to do the job.
Mr President, the latest annual report by the World Bank highlighted certain figures which were both scandalous in their bleakness and a challenge to the developed world.
This report told us how, in fact, poverty and under-development continue to gain ground and that a huge number of people are still unable to exercise their inalienable right to live in dignity.
Furthermore, there is the fear that the process of economic globalisation will increase the difficulties of the poorest countries and widen the chasm that separates them from the wealthy countries.
Given this situation, there is an inescapable need for greater involvement and greater effectiveness in the fight against poverty and underdevelopment.
If the European Union wishes to fully implement its policy of solidarity and finally eradicate poverty and its causes, we must begin to reassess the Union' s actions and the approach it should adopt towards its development aid policy, with a view to improving the effectiveness of those efforts.
That is why Mrs Sauquillo' s report and the proposals contained in it are so timely - and I would also like to congratulate her on her work - because they indicate the direction which the European Union should take in responding to the challenges of the twenty-first century in the field of development cooperation.
These proposals have been drawn up on the basis of an assessment of the current situation and take account of the obstacles which hinder progress in this field and discuss, in particular, the reform of the Commission' s services: greater competences for delegations and an increase in human resources devoted to development policy, the allocation of financial resources in accordance with the objectives of Community development policy, the simplification of administrative procedures and - of course - the complementarity and coherence of the Union' s development policies.
Let us hope that the Commission and the Council are receptive to these proposals and that together we can make speedier progress towards the ultimate eradication of poverty, thereby contributing to the creation of a fairer world.
Mr President, when preparing its proposal for reform, the European Commission did not include amongst the people it consulted those of us in this Parliament who deal with the issues of cooperation and development.
Therefore, on its own initiative, Parliament' s Committee on Development and Cooperation decided to present the report which we are currently discussing.
In this report we advocate the idea that the policy of cooperation for a fairer, more balanced and stable world is not some sort of secondary issue, but that it should be a real priority in European Union policy and that, furthermore, the efforts which we make in pursuit of this objective must be considered to be a substantial part of our project.
Furthermore, however, in Mrs Sauquillo' s report we draw attention to certain measures within the reforms proposed by the Commission, which we consider to be mistaken.
For example, they propose an institutional structure in which the body responsible for formulating cooperation policy and the body responsible for implementing that policy are not one and the same.
Our Committee shared the view of the rapporteur that the Commissioner for Development should both formulate and implement policy in this area, although these should be coordinated with the other policies dealing with external activities.
What seems to us even more serious in the Commission' s proposal is the territorial separation, which is maintained.
It does not seem reasonable that the Commissioner for Development should deal almost exclusively with the ACP countries while relations with Asia, Latin America and the Mediterranean region - which of course are very much cooperation and development issues - should remain in the hands of those responsible for external relations.
. Chairman, this debate is timely as the Commission has in fact taken important steps, new steps in the reform of external relations.
It agreed today in the creation of the new office responsible for European cooperation from the identification of activities to implementation.
The process of implementing the Commission' s decision of May on reform of external relations is going well.
There are three main elements to the reform: the enhancing of the programming process; the reunification of the management of the project cycle; and the devolution of powers to our delegations, all are making substantial progress.
As regards country programmes, the Commission has adopted a standard framework for country strategy papers.
This was discussed during the recent development council and was positively welcomed by all Member States.
We now have a harmonised scheme to draft country strategy papers and indicative cooperation programmes in all developing countries.
This will put the country concerned at the centre of the process, and it will also provide a basis for close coordination with Member States and other donors involved in that country.
This is the tool we have missed in the discussion over many years about how to coordinate better.
The clear focus of our action on fighting poverty as part of our overhaul of the policy framework and concentration on a limited number of sectors will be key elements in improving the impact of our cooperation.
Within the Commission, the inter-service quality support group has started work under the chairmanship of the Development DG.
It will ensure that strategy papers follow the agreed framework and methodology and I am confident that this group will bring more quality and consistency to our country strategies.
This covers the whole geography and it makes also a big improvement as to the consistency with the policy we are backing.
Last but not least, I shall with my colleagues, the external relations Commissioners, very soon submit to the college legislative proposals to modify the rules relating to the legal basis for all external relations instruments and budget lines.
This will allow the management committees to focus their work on strategies and not on individual projects.
As regards the reunification of the project cycle, the creation of the new office has now been agreed today formally in the Commission.
The office will be responsible for the management of all steps of the project cycle.
As from the beginning of next year, 250 officials will be transferred from the Development DG and the External Relations DG to the office and gradually contractual agents will also join the staff of the office while, in parallel, the technical assistance offices will be dismantled.
Here also, things have moved quite fast with the help and understanding of the budgetary authority.
Finally, a programme of devolution of powers to the heads of delegations has been set up.
In three years, about 120 delegations or officers will see major improvement in their working methods.
Together with extended financial powers they will receive upgraded computer systems and telecommunications.
Here again the understanding of the budget authority has played a crucial role for funding this major reorganisation of the European External Service.
In 2001, for instance, financial responsibilities will be deconcentrated to 22 delegations, 15 more delegations will see their computer facilities upgraded and 40 additional posts of officials will be allocated to external services.
The creation of SEM in 1998 was a first step towards improving the speed of delivery of 8 programmes.
Even if that reform were clearly insufficient, and this is beyond any discussion today, it did in fact lay the basis for a number of the changes which we are now pushing forward.
Simplifying procedures is essential if we are to speed things up.
It is also necessary to make sure that programmes can in future be easily managed by our delegations and made more accessible to our partners.
How could we have talked of increasing transparency when we had 46 different tendering procedures?
How could we expect the delegation official to move from Morocco to Mauritania or from Botswana to South Africa when the procedures of each programme and the relevant financial management systems had to be learned from scratch?
So simplifications are very necessary.
The resolution is quite correct in identifying as problems the unclear and divided responsibilities within the totality of the cooperation cycle and the problems we have had.
Moreover the creation of SEM provided no solution to the continuing mismatch between 8 voluminous administrative resources.
The resolution supports a reform going further in one respect than agreed today by the Commission.
It favours not just the reunification of the project cycle but of the whole cooperation cycle, including programming which now remains with the DG Development and DG Relex.
On this point, I can only say that the reform is a dynamic process.
The quality support group will enable a more deliberate and better-managed handover from the programming part of the total activity to the office.
This is something we are giving quite a lot of attention in order to have this run smoothly.
I would also remind Parliament that the decision contains a review clause.
We will have to assess how this new system works and, if necessary, we will take steps to pursue reforms further and deeper.
The Commission is very much aware of the importance of Parliament' s support for the reform of its policies and working methods.
I am very grateful for the supportive recommendations in Mrs Sauquillo' s report and for the very positive contributions tonight in this debate.
I assure that I will do my best to keep Parliament informed of policy proposals and I welcome the invitation to the Commission to report regularly to this Parliament on the reform of the external service.
Thank you very much indeed for your contribution, Commissioner.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.00 a.m.
(The sitting was closed at 12.30 a.m.)
Safety at sea
The next item is the joint debate on the Council and Commission statements on maritime safety and the following reports:
Report (A5-0343/2000) by Mr Watts, on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive amending Council Directive 95/21/EC concerning the enforcement, in respect of shipping using Community ports and sailing in the waters under the jurisdiction of the Member States, of international standards for ship safety, pollution prevention and shipboard living and working conditions (port state control) [COM(2000) 142 - C5-0174/2000 - 2000/0065(COD)]
Report (A5-0344/2000) by Mr Hatzidakis, on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation on the accelerated phasing-in of double-hull or equivalent design standards for single-hull oil tankers [COM(2000) 142 - C5-0173/2000 - 2000/0067(COD)]
Report (A5-0342/2000) by Mr Ortuondo Larrea, on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Directive 94/57/EC on common rules and standards for ship inspection and survey organisations and for the relevant activities of maritime administrations [COM(2000) 142 - C5-0175/2000-2000/0066(COD)]
Report (A5-0336/2000) by Mrs McKenna, on behalf of the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee, on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council decision setting up a Community framework for cooperation in the field of accidental or deliberate marine pollution [C5­0501/2000 - 1998/0350(COD)]
Madam President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I was especially keen to be with you today for the debate in the European Parliament on the first maritime package because you are about to examine three important texts which are a vital step in an issue which recent events have unfortunately made into headline news.
The European Union has 60 000 km of coastline bordering some of the busiest seas and oceans in the world.
The importance of maritime matters to Europe is undeniable but that also gives Europe a tremendous responsibility.
Since the Erika accident last December, considerable work has been done within our European institutions in order to move forwards.
In this connection, the first package of measures proposed by the Commission in March has been examined by Parliament and by the Council.
A second package of measures is expected in the near future.
The European Council in Biarritz examined this issue, and it will again be an important subject at the Nice Summit.
On the occasion of each disaster, the people of Europe express their anger at the lack of maritime safety and at the risks posed by the dozens of ships transporting toxic or hazardous substances which sail the waters off our shorelines on a daily basis.
I believe we ought to understand their emotion and their anger.
Naturally, we want to ensure that things move forward.
How can we accept maritime transport, which is vital for our trade and commerce, being developed to the detriment of environmental and human safety?
How can we accept that more and more ships, increasingly larger in scale and increasingly automated, ply the waters off our coasts without always respecting the strict safety, navigational control and social rules, after the fashion of land and air transport?
What we can no longer accept is the logic which makes the quest for the lowest price the operational rule of maritime transport.
What we can no longer accept, what we must no longer accept, is the connivance of certain States, which we know to exist, which register some of the oldest and most corroded ships, sometimes for just a few dollars. What we cannot and must not accept are the shipowners and operators who deploy underqualified and underpaid crews, classification societies which, for fear of losing a client, pay scant regard to the quality of the ships and their crews, and charterers who seek, above all, to reduce their costs.
I am told, especially in France, that stringent national measures must be adopted to protect French coasts: it has also been proposed that French coastguards should be deployed.
But the Erika and the Ievoli Sun were not French ships.
Their owners and their classification societies were not French, and they were both sailing in international waters when they sank.
Hence, even though each State has to assume its own responsibilities, decisions must be taken on a broader scale, at least on a European scale.
To achieve this, the Members of the European Parliament not only have a role to play - and I am well aware of their determination to do so - but, even more importantly, they are crucial in pushing forward Community regulations as far and as quickly as possible.
The people of Europe have woken up.
We see this in the case of animal meal and mad cow disease.
They are now challenging us; they are challenging international institutions and are calling on them to be effective.
If a new accident, a new shipwreck, occurs tomorrow off the coasts of Europe, we will all be justifiably denounced for our shortcomings, given these inadequate rules.
Personally, I want to tell you, ladies and gentlemen, Madam President, that the fact that we are examining these proposals today is living proof that the European Parliament is an effective institution, which can take on board the concerns of our citizens speedily and effectively.
That is why I am delighted that, under the impetus of the European Parliament, the Commission and the Council, significant progress is about to be made towards bringing about a truly safer maritime Europe.
The fact is that, on the basis of proposals we made last February, the European Commission put forward its own proposals with the greatest alacrity.
Today, you are examining these three texts in first reading.
I recognise that the European Parliament and its rapporteurs are motivated by an unshakeable will to see the rapid adoption of texts that are binding and effective in terms of maritime safety.
I also recognise that we share the same objective of improving maritime safety and the same analytical approach to the methods of achieving this.
I also recognise, as do the rapporteurs, that the technical aspects of the texts relating to classification societies and to port state control may need to be gone into more deeply.
The question arises as to whether the fact that there is a new part-session of Parliament in December will make it possible for any residual problems to be solved.
This may also enable the Council Presidency to have discussions with the Member States with a view to obtaining the Council' s approval of your proposals and to adopting the text at first reading, if necessary by qualified majority voting.
We could seek the broadest consensus on the system of liability of classification societies, on toughening up the system of banning the worst offending black-listed flag states, on introducing on-board black boxes, and on putting in place immediate inspections for ships posing the highest risks.
As regards this fundamental text on enhancing maritime safety and eliminating single-hull oil tankers, we can already congratulate ourselves on the work that has been carried out by the European Parliament.
If this text is adopted, as I believe your rapporteur will propose, it will make it possible to phase out more than a third of single-hull oil tankers by 2005 and the remaining two thirds by 2010.
This is a considerable achievement and it should make it possible for the dangerous ships sailing off our coasts to be speedily replaced and to ensure the greatest level of safety.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, rapporteurs, as you see, here we have the opportunity to enhance the safety of maritime transport.
We all know that these measures, which you are going to be debating today, are inadequate.
The Heads of State and Government highlighted the urgent need to examine a second package of proposals relating to the supervision and transparency of maritime transport and to the establishment of a European agency, and to making all actors involved in the maritime transport of hazardous or toxic substances aware of their responsibilities.
What is more, on this occasion France reaffirmed the need to set in motion a Community project on the training and working conditions of seamen, and I know that some of you also share this concern.
As you can see, it seems to me that the determination of all Community institutions is decisive, and I am convinced this determination is total.
It is starting to bear fruit here in Brussels, in the European Parliament: so that only safe, sound ships with trained crews living and working under normal conditions are authorised to sail, so that, at last, responsibility falls to each of the actors involved in maritime transport, so that the rules of maritime transport evolve with due regard to the coastal State' s right and its aspiration to protect its environment.
Madam President, I believe it is beyond doubt that the Commission, like the French Presidency considers the question of maritime safety and environmental protection to be of extreme importance.
In fact, it has been among the highest priority items on the Commission's agenda ever since the fatal sinking of the Erika 11 months ago.
Even more recently, only some weeks ago, another tanker, this time a chemical one, the Ievoli Sun sank off the coast of France.
Once again we were reminded of the potential disastrous consequences of such accidents.
The European public no longer tolerates oil spills or other environmental disasters caused by industrial accidents in shipping or otherwise.
Indeed, citizens have the right to expect that ships are safe and that they can transport their cargo in an environmentally acceptable way without endangering the life and economy of people living on nearby coasts.
Let me say that I saw the effects of the Erika accident myself whilst visiting the site and I know that it takes a very long time and a lot of manpower and, of course, money to clean up.
The effects are disastrous.
It is evident that, because of geography, it will always be the same regions that suffer the risks of maritime oil transports, despite the fact that the benefits of such transports are enjoyed by the Union as a whole.
We have taken this message very seriously indeed and it is exceptional that the Commission has acted so quickly and so consistently with six different legislative proposals within a year covering very different issues.
All lie at the very heart of the regulations of shipping as a whole and I want to remind you that, in addition to the three proposals which are to be discussed here today, the 'Erika II' package, as Mr Gayssot has already mentioned, will be put on the table next week.
This set of measures will propose the creation of a European maritime safety agency, a new European system for the adequate compensation of oil pollution victims and a new traffic surveillance system for EU waters.
This swift and focused approach resulting in the two 'Erika' packages and six proposals has created an enormous momentum.
I believe it is fair to say that only after the Erika disaster did Member States and the international maritime community fully understand and feel the determination of the European institutions to improve maritime safety.
They have realised that the determination remains even if such actions involve friction between the EU and the international maritime institutions and tension with the economic interests of the maritime industry.
Now that there are Commission proposals on the table we must not lose this momentum and forget the issue until the next accident happens.
In order to make a real change for maritime safety, the three institutions, but in particular the two co-legislators, must adopt the texts.
Legislation alone is not enough.
Member States must also ensure that they have the proper means to implement it, in particular I am thinking of the necessary recruitment of port state control inspectors.
Otherwise the benefit of the exercise will not be what the public expects from us.
On behalf of the Commission, I can assure you that it is our clear intention not to spare any effort to make ships safer and our seas cleaner, both next year and in the years to come.
This goes for all sectors of maritime transport.
I wish to conclude by thanking Mr Gayssot, President of the Transport Council of Ministers, for his encouraging comments.
We hope and expect that the Transport Council, on 21 December, will add their part to the common determination among the European institutions to bring about a real improvement in maritime safety by the adoption of common positions on all three texts.
The Commission is not ready to accept any compromise just for the sake of achieving a compromise.
Finally, I wish to thank this House and in particular the rapporteurs, Mr Hatzidakis, Mr Ortuondo Larrea, Ms McKenna and Mr Watts, for their understanding of the importance of the first 'Erika' package which is evidenced by the excellent work already done in such a limited time, and for the generally good cooperation between Parliament and the Commission in the field of maritime safety.
Madam President, in a few days time Europe will mark the first anniversary of the loss of the oil tanker, Erika.
Since then, sadly, there have been many other disasters at sea, we know only too well.
Before the Erika sank, many other ships sank as well, with the loss of oil, other cargoes, or tragically, the loss of lives of crew or passengers.
The lesson for this Parliament this morning must be that we have to conclude that maritime laws throughout the world are in a state of shambles and we have to begin the process of putting them right.
In that context, I wish to pay tribute to the Commission for bringing forward this 'Erika' package to try and right some of those wrongs, to try and prevent another Erika occurring.
We also pay tribute to the French Presidency, in particular the minister, for his determination to ensure that, in a very brief period of time, we truly learn the lessons of the Erika and make sure that they are applied to prevent an Erika-type disaster occurring again.
Without the minister' s determination, without the determination of the French Presidency, the IMO's working committee would not have agreed with us that single-hull tankers should be phased out rapidly throughout the world.
So I pay particular tribute to them for that achievement, which I hope is confirmed by the full IMO assembly very soon.
The main problem throughout the world is not the lack of maritime laws but the lack of the willingness of countries throughout the world to enforce them.
For example, I am afraid that the whole history of port state control is the lack of willingness of Member States within the European Union and beyond to implement port state control adequately.
That is why we welcome the amendment to the directive because it gives us the ability to make sure people implement the port state control Directive effectively.
However, in my view as rapporteur, the proposal from the Commission simply does not go far enough.
It is not strong enough.
In our view, if implemented, the Commission's proposal would allow another Erika to occur.
That is why this morning we cannot agree with the Commission's proposal but we are putting forward four proposals which we believe will significantly strengthen the proposal and would therefore secure this Parliament's support.
Firstly, we agree that there needs to be enhanced compulsory inspections of the most dangerous ships.
We all agree on that, but we have to find the methodology by which that particular priority can be implemented, and we have yet to secure an agreement between the three institutions on that.
I think it is within sight but we need to be sure that this agreement will be enforced.
Secondly, we make a demand again this morning for 'black box' style voyage data recorders to be fitted, not on just some ships or new ships, or in 10 or 20 years time, or whenever the IMO eventually agrees.
We want black boxes in all ships as soon as possible.
That is a very clear, fundamental demand, which we are not willing to compromise on.
Thirdly, we support, and there is a great amount of support, that a dangerous ship should not simply be detained and then allowed to return to sea.
If you are detained three times in a period of 24 months or 36 months, then you should be banned for life - three strikes and you are out.
There must be a clear signal to sub-standard ships that we will not tolerate them in European waters or in European ports.
Finally, we have a clear message to the flags of convenience, the black-listed states.
Countries like the Lebanon, Liberia, Syria, Azerbaijan, Albania, whose fleets we all know in our hearts are unacceptable overall.
Seventy, eighty, ninety per cent of their ships have serious defects.
We cannot tolerate a situation where these rogue flag states continue to allow their ships to sail the seven seas.
We must as a Parliament express our clear view that in a matter of years we simply will not allow them in.
Again I hope that we can find a compromise between the three institutions to secure the objectives which I know we all share.
We must eliminate dangerous ships.
We must protect our environment and, ultimately, we must save lives at sea.
Madam President, Minister, Commissioner, the importance of safety at sea is, I think, obvious, as we have seen twice in France recently with the Årika and the Ievoli Sun and as we have seen in my own country with the shipwreck of the Express Samina, a real human tragedy.
Eighty lives were lost and the final act of the tragedy was played out just yesterday, when the chief executive officer of the company which owned the ship committed suicide.
What is Parliament's stand on this particular subject?
Allow me to remind you that Parliament demanded action right from the start, on the very day the Erika was shipwrecked, calling on the Commission to put forward proposals for adoption.
We have examined these proposals and, because certain misunderstandings have arisen, I should like to say that we agree with the French Presidency on the timetable, which is why we are holding the debate now, today, before the second Council of Transport Ministers, so that decisions can be taken at first reading.
We have reached agreement as far as my report is concerned and, once it has passed its first reading, that will be that and we shall be able to start withdrawing single-hull tankers.
As you know, there are still some problems with the other two reports.
There are numerous points, as Mr Watts has already explained, where the European Parliament takes a firmer stand than the Council appears to be taking.
I understand and I welcome the minister's efforts to expedite these two reports as quickly as possible and I therefore consider that, in principle, his proposal to discuss the matter, if possible in December, is a positive one.
However, Minister, from my discussions today it would appear that your proposal is a little late - most people doubt that it will be technically possible for Parliament to find time in this last week to discuss the matter in detail from the beginning and vote on it in December.
In all events, please be assured that Parliament is at the Council's disposal, it will vote on its reports, they will be passed to the Council, the Council can approve a common position and we shall examine the reports as quickly as possible - they will be our top priority.
We shall be finished by spring, provided that the Council moves quickly and provided that the bilateral negotiations are a success and I think that they will be because the will is there on both sides.
Now to the withdrawal of tankers, to come back to my report.
Obviously, withdrawing single-hull tankers is a step in the right direction - in fact the IMO has also been making moves in this direction under the Marpol convention for some years now - and I think that the fact that the withdrawal of these tankers is being accelerated is even more encouraging.
Not that this is a panacea, of course, as we saw with the Ievoli Sun, which was a new, double-hull vessel, from which we must conclude that this measure alone is not enough.
We also need to take fundamental action on shipping registers and port inspections.
We need to advance on all fronts.
In this sense, the initiative by the French Presidency to contact the IMO, the International Maritime Organisation, in a bid to find a solution was an important initiative, because this is an international problem and international problems need international solutions.
I may add that the Commission's initiative in presenting this position was an important initiative because it acted like a sword of Damocles, effectively pressuring the ÉÌÏ into getting a move on.
The IMO working party did get a move on by reaching an agreement in principle - a few issues still need to be clarified, but most issues have already been clarified.
So what is the basic approach in my report?
For large tankers I have kept to the timetable of the IMO, the International Maritime Organisation.
For the second category, the post-Marpol tankers, I have kept, where there are different approaches, to the common European approach.
And I think, in the end, we have struck a balance.
We are protecting the environment, we are providing safety at sea but, at the same time, we have not touched competition in the shipping sector or the normal supply to the market.
For small tankers, we have adopted a compromise position between the 5000-tonne limit set by the ÉÌÏ and the 600-tonne limit set by the Commission.
We have reconciled the need for safety with the need to supply certain regions of Europe, such as island regions especially.
Madam President, I think that we have taken a step forward today, a fundamental step forward.
Parliament has taken a clear and unequivocal stand on the Commission's proposals, we are at the Council's disposal, in the hope, I repeat, that this issue will be brought to a close as quickly as possible, because all of us here, the Council, the Commission and the House, are acutely aware of the importance of this issue.
Madam President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, the Erika accident on 12 December of last year and the Ievoli Sun accident more recently clearly revealed the limits of the action of some classification and inspection societies in terms of monitoring the construction and, above all, the seaworthiness of vessels that are under their responsibility by delegation from the flag states.
However, and especially in this field, it is the public institutions who have the essential task of responding to the people' s demands with legislative initiatives that ensure the preservation of the environment and an optimum level of maritime safety, as well as the duty to ensure that the rules established are complied with correctly.
With this in mind, and in order to remove the obvious differences that exist on an international level between the various classification societies in terms of the competence of their inspectors, the level of development of their IT resources and the degree of technical requirements in their inspections, the Commission has presented us with a proposal to amend Directive 94/57/EC which will apply to all vessels, including those transporting oil products, and which establishes the rules that the Member States, and the classification societies authorised by them, should comply with.
This proposal has been analysed in the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, with opinions from both the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Protection and the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy.
There have also been talks with the sectors concerned and a great deal of contact with the French Presidency with the aim of being able to arrive at a text agreed by consensus that can be adopted quickly by the two legislative bodies: the Council and the European Parliament.
As a result of all of this, we have drawn up a parliamentary report amending the directive, which suggests improvements in various aspects aimed at strengthening the classification system, as a means and a valid tool for guaranteeing the safety of maritime traffic.
Thus, first of all, it is considered that no element of this directive should be interpreted as an exception to the absolute duty of the shipowner, which cannot be delegated, to maintain and use seaworthy vessels.
Subsequently, the harmonisation of the requirements that classification societies have to fulfil is being considered, with the Commission, assisted by a committee, being responsible both for the granting and, if necessary, the suspension or withdrawal of their European recognition.
In order to do this, they will take into account accident rates and the results of recorded incidents and accidents on all the vessels classified by each of the societies.
In this respect, there is a commitment to improving the quality of vessel inspections as a measure to prevent maritime accidents.
On the one hand, it is stipulated that the classification societies must have their own system of internal audits in order to measure the quality of their services in all the locations where they work, as well as clear rules for the responsibility and monitoring of all its branches and staff.
On the other hand, it requires that inspections only be carried out by specialist, exclusive inspectors, that they may not have a relationship with or be dependent on the shipowner in any way, and that the shipowner may not control the vessel classification society.
Meanwhile, a high degree of transparency is established for information on the results of the inspections carried out on vessels, operating conditions or operating restrictions and changes, suspensions and withdrawals of class.
This information must be made available to the European, State and port authorities, and to interested members of the public.
Also, the transfer of a vessel from one class to another - change of classification society - is dependent on all overdue recommendations and conditions that may be pending being satisfactorily complied with.
Thus, periodical inspections and supervisions are established, to be carried out by the Commission and the Member States in order to check whether this directive is being complied with by organisations that are recognised at European level.
Finally, it is stated that the Commission must lay down strict rules and ship maintenance inspection procedures, with a view to compelling all the participants concerned to assume their responsibilities.
In this area, the initial proposals from the Commission and Parliament' s amendments aimed to define the system of financial responsibility for the classification and inspection societies.
However, the Commission has already announced a second package on maritime safety, which will propose a system of responsibility for all the parties implicated in accidents: shipowners, the owners of the cargo, classification societies, etc.
I therefore consider that the various parliamentary groups should not now get lost in a partial debate that is also futile and will prolong the time it takes before final approval, on what should be the financial responsibility of classification societies.
I think it would be better for us to leave this for the second package and move forward immediately in order to reach a consensus at first reading with the French Presidency, so that in the next Council of Ministers on 20 December there will already be an agreement with the European Parliament and the first package can be adopted definitively this year.
Marine pollution, accidental and deliberate, is one of the major threats to the marine environment of western Europe.
This region represents one of the most intensely industrialised areas of the world where chemical, radioactive and hydrocarbon materials are routinely discharged into the marine environment and carried by cargo ships.
The region also contains one of the highest concentrations of shipping and includes several of the busiest shipping lanes in the world.
There are several tragic examples of accidental marine pollution from tankers and other ships carrying other forms of dangerous cargoes.
As we have just heard, two of the most recent were the Italian chemical tanker, which sank in the English channel, and also the Maltese registered oil tanker, the Erika, which sank off the coast of Brittany causing major environmental havoc.
Now, more by good fortune than planning, there has not yet been a major accident with a ship carrying radioactive materials.
Historically the marine environment has been used as the ultimate dumping-ground for much industrial waste.
Although industrial and radioactive discharges continue from a range of sources, the practice of direct dumping with little thought for the future is now widely regarded as unacceptable.
However, the legacy of the years when materials were simply dumped remains and has sometimes returned to haunt us, often with very severe consequences.
It is a lesson which tells us that, when we attempt to throw things away, they do not actually go away because there is no such place as 'away'.
This report acknowledges the need for establishing cooperation in the field of accidental marine pollution.
Furthermore, there is a need to broaden the definition of accidental marine pollution to include operational, historical, radioactive and other harmful substances.
Although much attention is rightly paid to the impact of marine accidents, in terms of chronic pollution it is the operational spills and discharges of hydrocarbons, radioactive materials and other harmful substances which, because they go largely unnoticed, are a cause of major concern.
In terms of the environment, whether a substance is accidentally or deliberately discharged is of no consequence, the environmental impact remains.
Furthermore, although the direct dumping of industrial materials, including military dumps of redundant munitions, is largely a practice which has been abandoned by Member States, the sights of such dumps continue to present a real threat to fisheries and in some cases a threat to human safety.
Often fishermens' lives are at risk, as is the health and welfare of the public who either visit the coast or live by the sea.
The transboundary nature of the marine environment, which means that pollution in one area can impact on a wider region, leads to the need for a Community-wide framework for cooperation in the field of accidental marine pollution.
Sharing information regarding hydrocarbons, radioactive substances and other harmful materials carried at sea or discharged into the sea, or which have been dumped as part of a historical dumping regime, is a vital prerequisite to facilitating the preparation and coordination of any responses necessary to mitigate the environmental and human health impacts of pollution incidents.
Effective mitigation requires a rapid response.
The longer an accident is allowed to go unchecked the wider the impact.
Hence, it is too late to start trying to get information after an accident has actually occurred.
Knowledge about the type and extent of potential pollution problems is also a prerequisite for correct preparation in terms of techniques, personnel and equipment at appropriate locations.
It is also necessary to be clear about the risks to the public and the environment and to alleviate justified public concern with accurate assessment of the risks.
The public's trust in the authorities is important and must be ensured with adequate responses.
Furthermore, the public have a right to know what preparations have been made, what types of material are threatening and what impacts are to be expected.
To this end, publication of information is a vital component in the establishment of a way for the general public to obtain information, emergency phone contact numbers, etc.
During the conciliation procedure the European Parliament delegation was able to reach a compromise with the Council, which is close to the original amendments on all the major questions.
The definition of accidental marine pollution includes a reference to munitions dumping.
A definition of harmful substances in line with the water framework Directive was added in order to cover but not, unfortunately, explicitly mention radioactive substances.
The cooperation includes exchange of information and mapping of munitions dump sites.
The polluter-pays principle is recognised, and the Member States should take this into account in order to provide compensation for damages.
Nature protection organisations are also included in cooperation at local level.
We did actually achieve most of what we wanted in the conciliatory procedure, maybe not exactly as we wanted, but we are happy with the result.
Madam President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, Commissioner, this first package of directives on maritime safety is without doubt one of the most important actions our House is going to implement in the course of 2000.
France may have been especially hit by various maritime disasters, in particular by the recent wrecks of the Erika and the Ievoli Sun off the coast of Brittany, nevertheless what is at stake is the responsibility of the entire European Union, which managed to draw the necessary conclusions.
The European Union has demonstrated its willingness to accept responsibility by putting forward strong proposals aimed at avoiding a recurrence of such serious accidents.
I thank Mr Gayssot who, on behalf of the French Presidency, has shown great conviction and skill in dealing with these issues effectively.
Nonetheless, we must be aware that these proposals which, as highlighted by the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, are essentially a response to the legal requirements which have been identified in the areas defined by their respective objectives will only be effective insofar as they are correctly implemented by the Member States and monitored by the Commission.
I would therefore like to highlight the points which, I feel, cannot be ignored if, following the adoption of these regulations and this directive, the expected progress is to be achieved.
First of all, the action of Member States must be translated into action integrated at European level.
We must deploy adequate numbers of properly trained people, used to cooperation, whatever their country of origin, and to using similar equipment.
I am convinced that this will mean, in the longer term, the establishment of a European coastguard.
I expect a great deal from the second series of proposals and from the establishment of a European maritime safety agency.
It is at this level that, in one way or another, this indispensable European cooperation must be found.
In the meantime, we must, at all costs, eliminate ships whose characteristics give cause for the gravest concern, and this means we must demand transparent intervention on the part of the inspection authorities, who must take measures against ships in a poor condition, irrespective of their age and structure, in line with a significant minimum target factor.
We must refuse to permit ships to transit the 200-mile exclusive economic zone if they are not equipped with an IMO-compliant voyage data recorder (VDR) intended to provide information for the purposes of inquiry in the event of an accident.
Nor let us forget, as Mrs McKenna said, that a large percentage of marine pollution is due to practices coyly described as 'operational' , that is, tank cleaning and other deliberate spills, against which the arsenal of deterrents must be intensified.
I know how much attention Mr Gayssot pays to the action of Equasis and now to Galileo, which we must implement.
Vigorous action must be taken on the question of flags of convenience, including that of the Kerguelen Islands in the case of France, and against ships which fly the flag of states with above average detentions and delays during the 36 months preceding the adoption of these directives, which are blacklisted in the annual report of the Paris Memorandum of Understanding.
Attention must also be paid to the complicated financial set-ups based on 'brass-plate' companies.
My thanks go to Mr Watts for the specific proposals he has made in this connection.
I thank the rapporteurs and I urge my fellow Members in the European Parliament to take these proposals into consideration.
They seem to me such as to make significant progress possible, which is crucial for the effectiveness of the legislative resolutions we are going to be voting on, which must not remain dead letter terms throughout the territories and waters for which Europe is responsible.
I have in mind not only the Atlantic and other oceans, but also the Mediterranean Sea, where disasters such as we have been experiencing could be irreversible.
Mr President, the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive amending Council Directive 95/21/EC deals with the selection of ships for inspection and items for inspection.
Amending the directive in terms of greater stringency in its application and the harmonisation of legislation, especially regarding the selection of ships for inspection and the scope of the different types of selection is clearly a positive step.
Even then, the European Union would need to ensure that current legislation is enforced by the Member States.
The fact is that Belgium, Denmark, Portugal, France, Ireland and the Netherlands, which are obliged to inspect 25% of ships, do not do so.
Worse still, the existing directives, even though they date from 1995, have still not been transposed into national legislation in Italy and Portugal.
In order for Member States to enforce existing legislation, they must allocate sufficient resources to inspections so as to ensure the proper application of international conventions and the directive amended by the European Parliament.
In concrete terms, this means employing additional inspectors, broadening the competences and the scope of inspection, notably concerning respect for social standards and for shipboard living and working conditions, and their publication.
Since human error is the root cause of 70% of accidents, the inspection of crews, their living and working conditions, their level of training and their numbers must be an integral part of a ship' s inspection.
Non-compliance with these standards must be a reason to detain a ship and to impose sanctions.
Furthermore, the Commission proposals still do not go far enough: they, in fact, concern no more than twenty or so ships.
The positions adopted by the French Presidency, which we have heard elsewhere, which would water down the Commission proposals even further, such as amending the proportion of ships targeted with the aim of reducing inspections by half, are naturally unacceptable.
I am in complete agreement with the rapporteur about refusing port access to ships posing a serious risk, irrespective of age, and those that have been flying a flag of convenience for more than three years.
We must also go further and ban them from sailing in Community waters.
To this end, we must strengthen international maritime law.
Moreover, it seems to me that we need to be more restrictive concerning flags of convenience, especially those of Member States, as well as those, Minister, of the islands of Kerguelen, Wallis and Fortuna in the case of France.
I will support this report and the Commission' s amendments, but I call on the Members of Parliament to also support the amendments of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy on social standards.
Mr President, Madam Vice-President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, let me begin by thanking the four rapporteurs.
The three reports from the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism were adopted either unanimously or by an overwhelming majority in committee.
In other words, we discussed the issues objectively and arrived at a common position.
For that reason, it is important that we stand by that position.
Mr President-in-Office of the Council, it was very honourable of you to ask at the last minute to have the votes on two of the directives postponed so that we can still reach an agreement. But I put it to you that this is a somewhat ambivalent move.
First of all, we in Parliament were criticised for having caused a delay.
The President of Parliament specially brought the debate and vote forward from the scheduled date in December to today's sitting. We have had no written statement from the Council which would have enabled us even to discuss a compromise.
I believe your intentions are honourable, but we can only discuss negotiating outcomes that have been examined by the Council.
To that extent, it is impossible to change anything, because we discussed this material meticulously in our committees, and it would be impossible to hammer out a compromise wording on the various issues that are particularly awkward, to have these compromises printed in eleven languages and to discuss them with our colleagues in time for next Tuesday.
I can therefore only ask you to accept the directive and the regulation in the form in which Parliament adopts them at noon today.
That would take us as close as possible to our common goal of increasing maritime safety without delay.
The choice is yours.
On those points where you feel unable to accept our proposals, produce a common position in December.
Do not delay it in the Council.
We are prepared to negotiate on proposed compromises for the second reading from January onwards, so that the second reading will be completed early next year, just like that.
I should like to reiterate that the urgent action upon which you are now insisting is not necessary.
For example, in the case of port state control, we certainly want tighter rules, unlike the Council.
But even if we did not complete the process in December, we should certainly have taken a huge step forward, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, if you managed to persuade the other States and your own administration to fulfil their obligations in matters of port state control under the old directive.
So if you want to do something to improve safety at sea, recruit new inspectors, carry out stringent checks under the existing law, and we shall have achieved a resounding success.
With regard to the liability of classification societies, which is a highly complex subject, we shall have to discuss this calmly and carefully.
We have discussed the material thoroughly in committee, we have adopted our opinions by a large majority or unanimously, and Parliament should do likewise at noon today.
If you achieve the same level of agreement in December, we shall be through to the next stage.
Mr President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, it is good that we are discussing and adopting the maritime safety package at first reading today.
What is less satisfactory, as has just been pointed out, is our past record; heaven knows that the States of the European Union have scarcely covered themselves in glory in the realm of maritime safety.
We know, of course, that port state control has not been a potent guarantor of maritime safety in the past, we know that the classification societies have not all discharged their duties as shipping inspectorates properly and conscientiously and that some of them have tended to be slipshod, and we know that tankers without double hulls are floating time bombs.
The more appalling thing, however, is that we knew all of this before the Erika sank.
Parliament has highlighted this situation time and again, and the sad fact is that the progress made since then would never have happened without this disaster and the public pressure that followed it.
Nevertheless, it is all the better that we are set to act, at long last, today.
I should like to express my very sincere thanks to the three rapporteurs and to say a few words on two or three specific points.
Mr President-in-Office of the Council, you said that you recognise Parliament's demand on port state control which Mr Watts made in his report.
My first request to you is that the Council sign, seal and deliver this very quickly.
It will then be law, as it were, and can be put into practice.
I believe that some rethinking will certainly have to be done between the Council and Parliament on the liability limit for classification societies, irrespective of what is decided today.
We shall agree to an international regime for double-hull tankers, but only on condition that a set of IMO rules is actually created in April.
Our committee unanimously supports this linkage.
If IMO rules do not materialise, we shall need European legislation.
But we hope that IMO rules will be adopted in April.
For these double-hull tankers we shall need many good and safe new vessels.
I should like to see European shipyards winning the orders to build these ships in fair and open competition.
The Commission recently presented a report in which it documented the fact that Korea is pursuing a very unfair dumping policy in the shipbuilding industry.
For that reason, Commissioner, I earnestly appeal to you and to your colleague, Commissioner Monti, to pledge this assistance which our shipyards need so urgently and to do so before Christmas.
The shipyards of Europe are beset by uncertainty.
Please help to ensure that the Commission sends a clear signal here.
We are working to establish new credibility; we should not jeopardise it by letting the Commission take the wrong course of action.
Mr President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, Commissioner, we have some good reports here.
We must send out a clear signal to unsafe flag states, to shipowners, including those from the EU who use these flag states, to shippers who can then get cheaper prices, and to classification societies that are not doing their job properly.
Safety comes at a price.
We should have the courage to say so sometimes.
I would just like to take a minute to go into the report by Mr Watts.
If a flag state defaults, then the port state must be given increased responsibility.
That is a sound principle and we must stick to it.
A black box, a blacklist: we are in complete agreement with all these things, but there are still a few points I would like to bring to your attention.
Countries that impose stricter controls run the risk of being saddled with shipwrecks in their ports, and environmental risks, and sometimes with human tragedies, when crews are left to their fate. These are all things we must take into consideration, and we must ensure that the port is not disadvantaged by well-intentioned measures.
Commissioner, we have a directive for end-of-life vehicles.
Ought we not to have one for end-of-life ships too, because I would not be at all surprised if there were a few environmental risks there too, which we should take a close look at sometime?
Secondly, we must invest in manpower and in crews.
Hence we will support a number of amendments tabled by Mr Vachetta.
We also need to invest in inspectors, because even if there are too few of them, we at least need to make sure we have skilled workers at the helm, so to speak.
At the end of the day, we must also be realistic about our limitations as legislators.
We have rules and they are not being implemented satisfactorily.
A number of speakers have already made the same point.
Take the Ievoli Sun, a double-hull ship.
It was built in 1989 and sailed under an Italian flag.
It has been inspected three times in the last three years.
So, there is more to safety than rules.
Everyone who works in the sector bears a heavy responsibility.
Those who are not prepared to take on this responsibility must stay out of our waters and our ports.
Mr President, Commissioner, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, on 18 January 2000 I brought you a cake of crude oil from the Erika which had come ashore on a beach.
This oil cake symbolises the enormous amount of work we have to do to make our seas cleaner and maritime transport safer.
The Erika and the Ievoli Sun are but the most recent names to date in the wrecking of an entire system. Firstly, the ecological system is being wrecked, with the natural marine heritage, flora and fauna destroyed or contaminated forever.
Then there is social wrecking, with gangs of third-world seafarers, modern-day galley slaves, exploited literally to the point of slavery.
Finally, we have economic wrecking, the result of untrammelled liberalism in maritime matters. The liberal tide of free trade which has been unleashed has swallowed up all safeguards, all preventative action and, ultimately, all morals, only to become engulfed itself in its own excesses, thereby revealing the lack of any Community maritime policy worthy of the name.
Who today answers for the integrity and healthy conditions of maritime transport?
What authorities claim to control and stamp out trade on the high seas, which is more maritime trafficking than maritime traffic?
Nobody.
What more proof do we need than these coffin ships fit only for the scrap yard, these thirty-year old single-hull tubs that take to the seas in stormy weather?
Eight thousand of the ninety thousand ships plying the seas around the world are sub-standard in terms of safety, and four thousand are carrying hazardous substances.
In the accident barometer measured against the gauge of shipwrecks the traditional mercury has been replaced by oil or residual acid.
Faced with the disastrous and anarchic situation in maritime transport, Europe has taken up the challenge and, just 11 months after the loss of the Erika, will be in a position to announce that never has a procedure been worked out quite as quickly.
This powerful political signal is in our hands.
It is up to us to adopt the 'Erika I' package and it is up to the Council to accept its final amendments.
In responding favourably to this acceleration of the timetable, our group has not, however, given up on the fundamental demands for the enhanced safety of the marine environment.
The revisions of the directives concerning port and ship inspections should get rid of the lame ducks as far as the classification societies are concerned and appreciably increase the number of inspectors in the Member States, provided, however, that the latter provide adequate resources to achieve this.
But we are also waiting impatiently for the second package, 'Erika II' , with the establishment of a maritime agency and outline plans for a European coastguard.
We may regret the delay in the timetable for the mandatory double hull for oil tankers and the Council' s abandoning of the proposed financial incentive system setting up differential charging of port and pilotage dues applicable to oil tankers, depending on whether they have a single or a double hull.
Nevertheless, we support this report which, with its revision clause, provides for the so-called American timetable to be given a second chance in the event of failure at the Marpol Convention in April 2001.
We are told that zero risk does not exist, but it has to be said that zero responsibility must not exist either.
With the 'Erika I' package we will be placing the first foundation stone of a substantive European maritime safety policy, in anticipation, of course, of the 'Erika II' package.
Mr President, Commissioner, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, the disasters of the past few months have brought to light the inadequacies of legislation, weaknesses in the systems of control and deficiencies in terms of human and financial resources.
Initiated by the French Government and driven forward within the European Council of Transport Ministers, the proposed European directives are an undeniable step forward.
They are supported by the parliamentary reports we are debating this morning.
The Watts report intensifies the measures against ships posing serious risks or flying flags of convenience without abolishing them altogether.
The Larrea report on classification societies harmonises legislation, develops sanctions that go as far as the withdrawal of authorisation, and increases compensation in the event of accident.
The Hatzidakis report, whilst banning single-hull oil tankers on the same dates as the American bans, nevertheless introduces a whole raft of exemptions which do not go in the desired direction, notably with the proposal to extend the deadlines for the phasing-out of single-hull vessels.
My group supports the Watts and Larrea reports. We will vote in favour of them.
The vote on the Hatzidakis report will be linked to the vote on the rapporteur' s amendments.
The two directives and the regulation we are examining are an asset in confronting the enormous challenge of maritime safety and need to be implemented as quickly as possible.
They are nevertheless inadequate in view of the magnitude of the problems that are posed.
Many players have stressed that the lack of maritime safety is largely due to deregulation and lenient practices.
In the context of increased competition, the primary objective is to transport goods as quickly as possible, at the lowest cost, at the expense of safety, the environment and the crews.
In measurable terms, the liberal rationale is effectively opposed to a high level of maritime safety.
I reiterate that current European decisions, whilst being a definite asset, do not question this rationale.
Hence the amendments to the Watts report presented by my group concerning social standards have been thrown out; yet the importance of the human factor is highlighted in each case.
It is a matter of great urgency that measures be adopted to put an end to social dumping and to review the conditions of crews in terms of status, salaries, training and working conditions.
To enable effective control to be carried out in ports it is necessary to reinforce the body of maritime inspectors and their qualifications, and hence to free up financial resources.
Much more stringent measures must be imposed to make classification societies effective.
Flags of convenience must be banned.
The consequences of their use in terms of non-compliance with standards are well known.
Yes, it is time that the European Union committed itself to actually reforming the maritime system.
This demands a strong political will and the financial resources to put in place even more controls.
In the run-up to the second package of proposals it seems important to me that we turn our thoughts to promoting the lasting development of maritime safety, which will involve yet further guarantees of safety and quality.
Mr President, a year ago, three regions of France were hit by one of the most serious oil spills in European maritime history when the oil tanker, the Erika, sank.
A few weeks ago, the west of France was struck by another ecological disaster, the wreck of the chemical tanker, the Ievoli Sun, and it is only today that the European Parliament will take the decision to strengthen maritime safety.
I was elected to office in a coastal region which is paying every day for the grave consequences of the wreck of the Erika: the serious lasting damage caused by this oil slick to the flora and fauna of the Loire, Brittany and Charentes.
It is paying for the dramatic repercussions on its economy - the 2000 tourist season was a disaster.
Workers in the fishing industry, in fish farming and aquaculture, and salt makers have been very badly hit.
The inhabitants of this region would have appreciated greater speed on the part of the Community institutions.
Nonetheless, I am delighted that the Commission proposals have taken on board the main demands formulated by the elected representatives of the coastal regions: the banning of single-hull oil tankers, strengthening port controls, and the assessment of classification societies.
On the other hand, it is unacceptable that the European Parliament should be moderating the initial Commission proposal concerning the ban on single-hull oil tankers.
Mrs de Palacio recalled a few days ago in Rennes that, in less than a year, the United States was able to unilaterally put in place a draconian law regarding maritime safety.
Why does the European Union need a timetable as long as that envisaged by our Parliament for the rapporteur' s amendments to phase out single-hull oil tankers?
Double-hull vessels may not be a cure-all, but phasing them in is an important measure that is likely to be subject to substantial technical improvements.
It seems to me that to create a discrepancy between the American timetable and the European timetable would be a very dangerous thing indeed.
If this were to happen, it is easy to see which waters and which ports the dangerous ships would head for.
It would be better if, faced with a proactive United States, our Parliament did not give the impression that, by systematically going for the lowest possible bid, it was soft on the issue.
If another accident were to happen, how would we be able to justify the European Parliament adopting such a slow timetable in order to wait for the IMO to reach a compromise at global level, where there are so many countries accommodating flags of convenience, which are not the most zealous militants on behalf of safety?
How, with the European Union under a French Presidency, will we be able to explain to the people of France that the European Parliament has abolished the necessary incentive and financial deterrence measures proposed in order to expedite the phasing in of double-hull oil tankers?
Parliament' s role should be to speedily and fully support the most stringent and most effective provisions proposed by the Commission, not to dilute them.
Quite the contrary, we should be proposing going much further.
This first package is simply a first step.
It is vital that we put in place a system which makes the entire transport chain aware of its responsibilities so that we can finally emerge from the current lack of transparency.
We hope that the second package of measures to be proposed to us will be commensurate with this need.
Irrespective of the technical measures that will be adopted, one of the major reasons for this lack of safety will remain as long as the exponential growth in traffic linked to the overdevelopment of the North Sea ports is not balanced in the Channel and North Atlantic areas.
Is it reasonable that the zone of frequentation of the port of Rotterdam should extend as far as the South of France?
Would not one of the most effective safety measures be to reduce traffic in this zone by regenerating the port infrastructures of the Atlantic and the Mediterranean?
This is the thrust of the two amendments to the reports by Mr Watts and Mr Hatzidakis which I tabled on behalf of my group.
It is an area of consideration that the Member States and the Commission should explore.
If the issue of overcrowding in the Channel and the North Sea is not dealt with, this zone will inevitably become a highway for marine pollution and a permanent threat to the safety of our seamen, the beauty of our coasts and the quality of our marine resources.
The coasts of France are not there to become a dumping ground for European maritime traffic nor receive munitions, crude oil and styrene on their shores.
Mr President, safety is a serious issue for various forms of transport.
More than 40 000 people die in road accidents every year, and although the victims of shipping disasters are fewer in number, each human life counts, and what is more, the natural world is coming under increasing threat owing to accidents at sea.
Flora and fauna, in particular birds, are the victims of oil and other forms of pollution.
It is sad that a tanker had to be wrecked off the French coast, with disastrous consequence, before the package of measures now on the table was put together. We are very satisfied with this set of measures, as we are with the various reports.
I will confine my comments to the Watts report on port state control.
As the rapporteur very rightly points out, the condition of a tanker is more indicative than its age.
I also support his demand for compulsory voyage data recorders.
His regime for ships that have been detained several times or that fly a flag which has been on the blacklist for three years, makes a great deal of sense.
What I would ask though, is what percentage of the ships should be refused at the present time on the basis of these criteria?
Neither the size nor the status of such a flag state, for example an candidate country, must result in the undermining of the measures.
Speaking of the responsibilities of the port state, we must take care not to underplay the importance of the tasks to be fulfilled by the port authorities.
It is highly likely that the refusal of the port concerned to allow the Erika to put in, dramatically increased the scale of the disaster.
It would be to the credit of the acting President-in-Office of the Council if he were to set things right in his own country too.
Mr President, Commissioner, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, just now I heard you acknowledge that our Parliament was an effective institution.
We demonstrated this effectiveness on the day following the loss of the Erika.
I remember the occasion well: we were in Strasbourg during the December part-session when we learned of this disaster.
Knowing Finistère well, I knew from the start that we were unfortunately about to experience catastrophic marine pollution which would leave its traces on the shorelines of France for a long time to come.
And so, with anger welling up inside us, we demanded immediate proposals from the Commission, which were put to us in March.
Since then, we have experienced other disasters - some in Greece - and then the Ievoli Sun accident.
We are all sick and tired of seeing our oceans and seas turned into dumping grounds.
The McKenna report, in its third reading, recalls a certain number of key principles concerning accidental and deliberate pollution, for example the infamous illegal practice of tank cleaning, which are underpinned by the 'polluter-pays' principle.
But certain problems continue to be intractable, even if things are moving in the right direction.
Have we not wasted a lot of time since last March?
Where in fact was the political will?
The Council must commit itself to adopting stringent measures, which we are all hoping for, concerning port inspections, classification societies, the responsibility of shipowners and charterers and, finally, the responsibility of FIPOL, which is behaving in a scandalous manner.
People in Brittany are still waiting for compensation for damages.
Today, a large number of texts are being put to us, and there are yet others to come.
This risks compromising cohesion, especially since a number of existing directives are at stake, one of which is the framework Directive on water.
All this needs to be rationalised and we must turn our mind to producing a framework text which would simplify things at international level.
In the interim, Minister, let us intensify technological research into marine depollution.
It is important that the exchange of knowledge and cooperation are encouraged and sustained in this highly technical area in order to preserve our natural marine heritage.
Let us hope that the measures we will adopt together will enable us to prevent further marine pollution and to protect our marine heritage.
Mr President, I am only going to comment on and explain the majority position of the Socialist Group on one of the proposals, the one that modifies the directive regulating inspection organisations.
The guarantees of the seaworthiness of vessels required that considerable measures be adopted on the societies responsible and on inspections, as has already been said.
The current situation is simply unacceptable.
In this sense, the text proposed contains some new elements that are interesting and positive but which, in our opinion, are not sufficient.
Public opinion is demanding that we act swiftly in this situation, as the President-in-Office of the Council has said, but that speed needs to be compatible with an acceptable minimum text.
No one in the Council of which you are the Chairman should be tempted to accuse of us of moving too slowly; we demand some minimums and everyone will understand that.
Our fundamental discrepancies are to do with two areas: on the one hand, the issue of responsibility and compensation, for which the amounts and the minimums should be adequate and equal across the whole of the European Union - we do not think that subsidiarity is acceptable. On the other hand, there is the independence of classification societies.
That independence should be very clear at this time when many shipowners and proprietors are forming their own societies that are authorising boats.
This is unacceptable.
Therefore, in general, we are not happy with the compromise text.
As we understand that it is the minimum text that the Council will accept, we are not going to contribute to its adoption in the hope that it will be improved at second reading, but we will not vote against it because we recognise the excellent work done by the rapporteur, Mr Ortuondo, which resulted in some agreed amendments which show us the path to take for the next reading.
So, there are some interesting new elements, but they are not enough.
Mr President, since the breaking up of the tanker Erika, a package of measures has been devised, under political pressure, with a view to improving the safety of ships at sea.
Of course, the key question is will these measures actually lead to sub-standard ships being taken out of service?
I am not so sure.
Although it pains me to say it, the fact is that we are tinkering about at the edges with these measures, rather than tackling the real root causes of the problems.
Mrs Peijs and I have carried out a short investigation, and I would very much like to hear the Commissioner' s response to the following question. Can you tell me what became of the 750 ships that Honduras removed from its register?
Were they really taken out of service?
And where are they in that case?
Secondly, is it true that in Cambodia, ships can be registered within twenty minutes via the Internet?
Thirdly, I feel that a tough line must be taken with the classification societies.
They are given too much free rein at present.
I have tried to incorporate an incentive to take responsibility by raising the limited liability, which involves relatively small sums, but there is often nothing to be gained.
But I have opposed the idea of unlimited liability because this impedes the market and is counterproductive.
What is the situation with regard to the port state control?
Commissioner, the current rules are not being properly adhered to as it is, never mind new ones.
The Member States are simply not prepared to release enough money.
There is a lot of talk but little action.
As I see it, the Council must show greater commitment to making more resources available and exacting better sanctions.
Then there is the matter of how to deal with flags of convenience.
I have quite a list.
I will vote in favour of the rapporteur' s proposal that ships which fly a blacklisted flag for three years in succession should be excluded, thereby sending out a signal to these flag ships that sub-standard controls will not pass muster in Europe.
We do not want them in our ports or in our waters.
In short, measures are an informal way of trying to bring safety to the desired standard.
That is bad for the people, the sea, the environment and for the sector' s image.
There should be more cooperation within the sector.
I therefore support the initiatives for a European maritime platform.
Mr President, first of all I would like to thank the rapporteurs for their sterling work.
It is absolutely imperative to ensure, taking the environment, safety, fishing communities, and tourism into account, that we do not have a repeat performance of what happened before.
All eyes were on the Erika in the first instance, but a tanker was sinking in other waters off Turkey at the same time.
The Ievoli Sun was double-hull but contained chemicals in a particular form.
Mr Gayssot, Greek ships have sunk without warning, when there were no storms in the vicinity.
In short, as I understand, there are reasons besides storms in the Channel that should prompt us to consider stopping shipping traffic there.
At the end of the day, we are talking about eight to ten thousand sub-standard ships.
In other words, this is a very extensive problem.
The age of ships is a factor, but not the most important one.
Maintenance plays a very important part.
That is what we are discussing now, along with manpower.
The human aspect of the whole issue is extremely important.
I would just like to concentrate on two dossiers: port state control and the phasing out of single-hull oil tankers.
Everyone has stated - and I absolutely agree - that the current 25% inspection rate necessary for port state control has not been achieved yet.
Some countries should take a very close look at what they need to do about this back home.
These countries must make the necessary resources available, people must be trained and so on.
In particular, the President of the current Transport Council has a great deal of work to do in his own country in the near future, even though he will not be the President any more.
In a nutshell, we should not just look at the technical side of the matter, we also need to look at crewing issues, and not just make laws, because as far as I am concerned, it would be no bad thing to raise that 25% inspection rate even higher in time, but first we need to take the other steps.
Once again, enforcement is the most important measure.
I have a few brief comments to make regarding single-hull ships.
I am not happy with the fact that ships weighing 600 to 3000 tonnes have been left out.
Nor am I pleased that the financial incentives have been completely removed from the dossier.
I do not think the proposal was well drafted, but feel that we are certainly going to have to build financial incentives or sweeteners into these measures in the near future.
Thirdly, when we discuss dossiers of this kind, I think it becomes clear that we do not make the connection between our oil supply, on the one hand, and the fact that we are still using fossil fuels on the other.
Suppose we have new ships built, phasing single-hull ships out and building new double-hull ones, then we will have a more extensive fleet, when what we should in fact be doing is introducing other forms of fuel supply.
Mr President, we should not forget that everything which we condemn here is due to the fact that shipping is, by definition, a globalised sector par excellence and has been for a long time.
It is dynamic and disorganised and the risks inherent in it are those inherent in the global economy as a whole.
It is not properly regulated.
And there is nothing which international organisations such as the IMO or technology, black boxes and so on can do to provide this sort of regulation.
Naturally, we shall be voting in favour of everything our fellow Members have proposed because these are important steps.
But what we really need is an integrated, organised policy of intervention and regulation on the right scale, or at least on a European scale, which is why, Commissioner, we hope that the second or third package which you present to us will contain provisions in this direction - surveys, inspectors, coastguards, ports, installations and fines for those who do what they do on the high seas, because quite simply, the fines cost less than doing the job properly in port.
But these measures need to be taken at European level and applied by everyone, rather than varying from country to country.
Finally, everything we have said in our amendments in support of social and working conditions on board ships is quite simply a question of social and political solidarity.
It is also a question of efficiency.
The accidents which occurred in Greece, all of them were due in the end to so-called human error by people who were tired, who were sleepy, who had been working three days without a break and, so of course, they resulted in what has been so hypocritically referred to as so-called error.
Mr President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, the increased incidence of disasters at sea is not the work of pure chance.
Our political duty requires us to adopt urgent measures but we must also enforce existing legislation.
We can no longer confine ourselves to telling the people hit by these ecological and economic disasters that we have discussed these problems, that we are giving them some thought, and that we will avoid them in future.
If we want to be credible, we must act quickly and put an end to sterile political diatribes.
The time has long gone for simple compromises, which some, moreover, are saying will be difficult to achieve.
We must adopt draconian measures and enforce them at an international level by reforming the erstwhile International Maritime Code.
Is it necessary to recall that maritime safety is the preserve of international law, especially since pollution never stops at the limits of national territorial waters and that it starts for the most part in international waters?
Given that, it is no longer a question of making the players involved aware of their responsibilities - as that is not effective - but of striking with real binding force where the impact will be felt the most, that is at financial interests.
Our political action must be powerful and commensurate with ecological urgency.
We must do away with hypocrisy. The way to achieve this necessarily lies in deploring the financial links that exist in some cases between shipowners and classification societies and in involving the parties concerned - shipowners, shippers, insurers and maritime administrations - in order to find a comprehensive solution.
The reports currently under debate must be the draft for a genuine maritime safety policy, but they must in no way be limited to the Community context.
We have the political and economic resources to impose our choices and to ensure that they are respected.
To conclude, I will recall that the Americans did not wait for us to promulgate the Oil Pollution Act in 1990 in response to the loss of the Exxon Valdez in 1989, whilst the loss of the Amoco Cadiz in France dates back to 1978.
Let us have the political courage of our ecological ambitions.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, it has been one bit of bad news after the other. First there was BSE and the prohibition of animal meal, and then yesterday a bill banning fish meal was presented to the German Parliament.
Yesterday too, we received news from the Commission, borne by three Commissioners who really ought to know better, that the Commission is not prepared to extend aid to the European shipbuilding industry beyond 31 December.
What else do we intend to do to ourselves in the European Union?
I cannot understand it, and the Koreans must be laughing up their sleeves.
By contrast, the Environment and Transport Committees have acted wisely and boldly in dealing with the first 'Erika' package, albeit in response to pressure in the wake of the accident.
We quickly received the package and discussed it promptly in Parliament, which is a praiseworthy achievement.
A second package is already under way.
For your part, Minister, I am sorry to say that you have been telling us "we could..." and have been talking about flags of convenience, black boxes and the like.
But why are you not doing these things right now, rather than tomorrow?
You said, "We have the opportunity to improve safety."
So take that opportunity now, Minister, rather than later.
Parliament has long been calling for such action.
We parliamentarians are certainly not letting the grass grow under our feet.
As to the accusation that Parliament has been solely responsible for any delay, I can only say that this is an attempt by others to hoodwink the public and divert attention from themselves and their own failure to deliver.
For that reason, we cannot agree to a postponement of the vote.
We must send the right signal.
The flags are at half-mast already, and I do not expect a rapid result at any price but rather the best possible result within the shortest possible time.
The conciliation procedure is an option.
It may be a necessary evil, but it is an option, and I hope that all of us will contribute as best we can.
We all know each other's positions by now, which is another reason why we need to vote today.
As far as the classification societies are concerned, it is my duty and my wish to re-emphasise on this occasion that the main focal point of the present discussion seems to be liability.
Everyone understands that.
People's futures and the survival of many businesses are on the line here, not to mention the environmental implications.
The Commission intends to look at this liability issue again in the second 'Erika' package, and rightly so.
I am convinced, however, that it is vitally important in the context of maritime accidents to consider the whole chain of responsibility and to examine every aspect of the matter.
It is regrettable that nobody is looking beyond the classification societies in the present discussion of the liability issue.
This, at least, is the impression that has been conveyed.
The spotlight is focused on the first link in the chain of maritime operators without being turned on the liability of the other parties.
So this still needs to be rectified.
We must have a full picture of all parties' responsibilities and hence of their liability.
Mr President, these texts have been imposed on us by exceptional, dramatic and repetitive circumstances and, faced with two accidents in less than a year, those of the Erika and the Ievoli Sun, public opinion has expressed a Europe-wide concern and a feeling of urgency.
This shows that, in this area more than any other, we have a tremendous responsibility and we must, it seems to me, stifle any institutional pride we may have.
The European Parliament has responded to this ambition of public opinion by means of a rapid, accelerated procedure, the credit for which must be firmly laid at the door of our four rapporteurs, Mr Hatzidakis, Mrs McKenna, Mr Watts et Mr Ortuondo Larrea.
We had a common objective. It seems to me that that was the one we had to pursue: to arrive at a text during the December part-session and to achieve a consensus between the Council and Parliament.
That is what public opinion was expecting and if, by misfortune, another accident were to happen we would be very severely judged.
It turns out that two texts risk putting us at odds with the Council and so, this evening, it is likely that the imminent publication of directives and regulations, which everybody is hoping for, will not be announced.
Personally, I regret that, due to over-hastiness, or perhaps due to a lack of level-headedness, these ten days have been cruelly snatched from us, and I also regret that we have not taken the hand extended to us by the Council so that, in December, in ten days to be exact, we might achieve what it seems we are all apparently hoping for throughout this Chamber.
Personally, I regret this and I believe that it will be severely judged.
I believe that Parliament' s position is the correct one to take on most of these texts, because it is perhaps the most demanding one, except on the issue of double hulls.
Mr President, I therefore appeal for the adoption of a common position on the liability scheme of classification societies, the system of banning ships, black boxes and systematic inspections, to tackle what we will doubtless be unable to reach agreement on today.
The French Presidency will have given the matter a crucial boost, the effects of which will unfortunately only be felt in two or three months' time.
We are taking any number of risks, including that of conciliation.
I believe we will come to regret this.
Mr President, I too would like to thank the rapporteurs for their successful reports.
In them, attention has been focused on factors that are essential for increased safety at sea.
There is, however, still much to be done to improve safety at sea.
It is important to tighten up regulations regarding the control of harbours and ports even further, and enhance its effectiveness.
We also have to improve the way we approve classification societies and monitor their work, and expanded inspections must be carried out, in particular on high-risk vessels.
I would also like to point out that it is not enough that the Union alone should find solutions to increase safety at sea.
For example, questions of responsibility must be dealt with on a global basis.
That also goes for the matter of double-hull design requirements.
Rules applied regionally are not enough here either: we need global IMO agreements.
For example, for Finland it is vitally important that Russia is included in these agreements.
We must ensure that vessels that are no longer seaworthy and pose a risk actually are scrapped and are not brought back into service flying someone else' s flag.
Mr President, I shall be voting in favour of all the technical measures aimed at enhancing maritime safety even though, at the same time, I deplore their inadequacy.
But the real problem is the political will to adopt and implement measures binding upon all those endangering the community and the environment in order to make a profit.
These are not only the shipowners but also, more especially, the contractors, who are large multinationals, as the losses of the Erika and the Ievoli Sun clearly illustrated.
These binding measures should involve not only the detention of dangerous ships but also the seizure of such vessels and their contents.
What is more, these major companies should be made financially liable to the extent of their assets for any damage that they cause.
The fuel dumps of Total and Shell, the charterers of the Erika and the Ievoli Sun respectively, should have been immediately confiscated until all the damage that had been inflicted due to their irresponsibility had been fully compensated.
Justice can be merciless towards the poor who are unable to pay a tax or a fine, and will even go so far as to seize their meagre belongings.
Laxness towards large companies is indeed a sign that they are more powerful than elected institutions.
Mr President, allow me first to express my thanks both to the Commission and to the three rapporteurs for their important work on this matter.
The Erika catastrophe in autumn 1999 caused many to react, which is a good thing.
At the same time, it would have been even better if we had acted in advance instead of reacting afterwards.
Then perhaps we could have avoided a catastrophe.
There is much that is good in what we must decide on today.
That applies both to the stricter requirements on the design of oil tankers, better rules on port state control and the tightening up of the rules on classification societies that will also result from this.
At the same time, I feel that many question marks remain.
For example, what is the point of preventing vessels from putting into EU ports if we do not prevent them from navigating our waters?
Realistic assessments suggest that we will only be able to stop a further 10-12 vessels per year.
Will this be sufficient?
The latest major accident resulting in oil discharges just a few weeks ago involved a double-hull tanker.
This means that not even the mandatory introduction of this type of hull will provide any kind of certain solution.
Allow me to take up one further matter, namely all the cases of oil discharges that are not an accident but rather are entirely deliberate discharges.
Oil traffic in the Baltic has doubled since 1995 and in a few years' time will have trebled.
Every day we suffer two new discharges on average.
A short time ago a vessel with a Maltese flag of convenience discharged oil in Swedish waters just off Gotska Sandön.
The vessel then sailed into the port of Tallinn in Estonia.
The question is who can act.
Under the MARPOL convention Sweden is not entitled to act because the vessel is no longer in Swedish waters.
Neither can Estonia act, because the vessel did not cause any damage there.
Malta, for its part, probably does not wish to act, because the country enjoys great economic gain from this type of vessel being registered under the Maltese flag.
And so yet another environmental marauder goes free.
The proposals that we have submitted to date will not solve this problem in the future either.
I therefore consider that there is an incredible amount still to do in this area.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, clearly the issue of safety at sea, in other words, the safety of human life and environmental protection, is a very serious issue.
If we are to deal with it, we need strict, modern rules with reliable inspectors and suitably-staffed government agencies to ensure that they are applied.
Proposals have been made to prohibit ships which seriously endanger our seas from docking, to record voyage data so that conditions along a ship's course can be checked in the event of an accident, to gradually make double hulls compulsory and to improve regulations and standards governing ship inspection and control bodies.
Of course, nothing would be simpler than to set limits and restrictions which, in theory, would preclude any accident.
However, they would be impossible to apply without taking other basic aspects of the problem into account.
Shipping should not be treated as the "enemy", nor is it. It should be seen as a friend which could do better.
We need to take action to improve safety which causes shipping and trade as little pain as possible and we must be sure that such action will not do more harm than good.
In other words, we must not exaggerate.
I am positive that everyone would rather have more lenient regulations which are applied than stricter regulations which are not applied.
May I remind the House that five Member States - and to avoid misunderstanding, Greece is not one of them - have been charged by the Commission with failure to apply the previous, more lenient directive.
I think we can strike the required balance on the basis of the Commission and IMO proposals and the reports under discussion, on which the rapporteurs really do deserve to be congratulated.
The tragedy is that, even if regulations are introduced, they will not stop the type of accident in which the Greek car ferry Express Samina was involved, i.e. where a captain "decides" to ram his ship into charted, well-lit rocks.
Mr President, today we are discussing maritime safety on the basis of three reports, on which I would like to congratulate the rapporteurs warmly on.
Immediately after the Erika disaster the Commissioner started working on an extensive legislation package, and in all honesty, I am compelled to say that apart from the liability aspect, the legislation really was not bad at all.
The problem was, and remains, compliance with legislation, inspections and sanctions in the event of non-compliance.
Today we are discussing the safety of ships and flag states, port state control and the classification societies.
Unfortunately, pressure of time means I have to be selective.
Firstly, the issue of the classification societies.
It does not really matter that they are supposed to have maximum unlimited liability.
The majority of them cannot afford it anyway.
What is important is to ensure that when they make a serious and inexcusable mistake, they are shut down, i.e. we must close them, put a stop to their activities, end of story.
That would keep them on their toes a bit more.
It would also seem to be better than imposing sanctions that do not yield anything.
Then there are the flag states.
I personally am in favour of banning ships that sail under cheap blacklisted flags from the ports and territorial waters of the Union.
However I can see the practical difficulties associated with this.
Is it not worrying that the sister ship of the Erika, the Maria S, carried on sailing round undisturbed for more than a year before it was detained and sent to the scrap heap?
Why was the Maria S not taken out of service by its classification society?
What did the flag state actually do?
Various states, which are completely irresponsible to my mind, offer registrations that take a mere twenty minutes via the Internet. It is in every sense a virtual affair, with no form of inspection.
Mrs Sanders has already mentioned Cambodia.
Cambodia advertises this form of registration in the shipping news. What is the Commissioner doing about ships that have been registered in this manner?
Are we going to wait until they are detained?
Once, twice, until there is oil on the North Sea beaches.
It is obvious that a bonafide company does not register its ships in Cambodia.
The second example is Honduras.
750 ships were in an unspeakably poor condition even by Honduran standards.
I would like to ask the Commissioner whether we follow these ships with a tracking and tracing system?
Because surely the question arises as to which flag states have accepted these floating wrecks?
Where are they now?
I do not think we can continue to operate with any credibility without a tracking system of this kind.
Other countries besides those of the EU must take a firm hand with the flag states.
Some of our Member States make a mess of their own registers.
A strict test must also be applied under real life conditions to those countries that have systems which look good on paper but which do not amount to anything in reality.
If they fail the test then the same rule applies to them as it does to other untrustworthy flag states: we do not want their ships in our ports.
Mr President, Commissioner, Minister, ladies and gentlemen, several times in the debate we have been reminded of the Erika disaster and other catastrophes; each of us could add to this list.
Our past and recent history has been dotted with calamities, and that might also seem quite natural, though upsetting, if we did not remember that 75% of them have been caused by human hand.
So it is important to state the political and cultural bottom line: it is time to get rid of the emergency culture, and it is time to affirm the prevention culture.
The reports that have been presented are a move in this direction.
It is significant that the Commission, through the Commissioner, Mrs Wallström, has this morning confirmed its priority commitment to a modern maritime safety policy, and the declaration made by the Council is also important, but this declaration is binding in respect of the effort that must be made to bring this matter to a definitive close by the end of December.
This has been a good start, but we must also move on to other stages.
Some have been announced this morning by the Commissioner, and I shall mention four of them: legislative and organisational harmonisation by the candidate countries for enlargement; training of human resources and recognition of the rights of those working in the sector; the setting-up of a European maritime agency, with the full involvement not only of the Member States, but also of local and regional authorities; and affirmation of the principle of liability, and hence redress, for environmental damage and not just social and economic damage.
Ladies and gentlemen, let us ensure that the "polluter pays" slogan does not remain just a slogan!
Mr President, Minister, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, transport by sea is undoubtedly one of the least environmentally damaging modes of transport.
This is demonstrated by the fact that the measures adopted at international level to improve safety and reduce accidental pollution have certainly had some success.
Nevertheless, we still unfortunately witness serious incidents, such as the recent sinking of the Erika, which show how urgent it is to adopt new measures to promote marine safety and to avoid any repetition of incidents that have such major ecological and economic repercussions on our coastlines, our seas, fisheries and tourism.
With regard to these three new proposals on maritime safety, I can only congratulate the three rapporteurs, who in a very short time have shown how determined our Parliament is to adopt new measures to enhance safety at sea, controls and construction standards, and that it is no longer tolerable that similar incidents should occur again.
I believe it is our duty to strengthen the enforcement of existing directives on these matters and to adopt new measures designed to clear our seas of sub-standard vessels, real sea-going old rust buckets.
In addition to adopting this package of measures, the European Union should, in my view, act in a worldwide context, identifying solutions agreed at international level that will improve maritime safety and at the same time not penalise our shipowners in comparison with others.
In conclusion, I would highlight the need to set up an information exchange system among the Member States on navigation safety in areas with heavy tanker traffic, so as to ensure constant monitoring and an immediate reaction to any hazards.
Madam President, on behalf of the Socialists in the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, I should like to make a few brief comments.
The Commission has the merit of overcoming inactivity and contributing to a political solution.
Parliament wants effective and coherent action for the sector.
We know that the cause of accidents, which are becoming more numerous and more serious despite the technology now available, lies in the competitive madness in shipbuilding, leading to declining quality, and the absurd economic management of ageing fleets, which hinges on a strategy of drastic cuts in maintenance and crews.
Accidents are not just caused by the age and type of the vessel; they also occur because of the unscrupulousness of ship owners and operators who make use of every possible method to cut costs.
Some of these have been repeatedly mentioned here, from flags of convenience to the permissiveness of port authorities and the complicity of classification societies.
The problem of safety for this form of transport requires offenders to be penalised rigorously; imposing such penalties entails costs that must be shared by the whole sector worldwide, so that we do not penalise the European sector even more.
We agree with imposing a lower limit for personal injury or death and material damage, leaving the Member States free to raise these limits.
We disagree with the idea according to which the fitness of classification societies depends on their size or even the number of inspectors on their staff, and prefer to be guided by the consequences of their certification, and therefore the system of civil liability compatible with the risk is necessary.
Allow me to make a comment on Portugal, which has been mentioned here.
Portugal supported the changes to Directive 94/54 but disagrees with the abolition of classification societies by smaller countries.
Classification society performance must be assessed by common criteria: number of accidents, incidents or detentions of inspected and certified ships that cause pollution.
It is unrealistic to expect the number of accidents to fall without international coordination channelled through a political and entrepreneurial commitment that creates a new operational mentality.
Mrs Chairman, a series of high-profile ship disasters, particularly involving oil tankers, has hit our continent in the recent past.
Tremendous damage has been caused to nature as well as to the livelihoods of the population living in these areas.
Our electors ask us what we are doing to prevent catastrophes like these?
I would like to thank Ms Wallström and Ms De Palacio for the action they have taken in the field of maritime safety.
They definitely have reacted quickly and worked swiftly for better rules and legislation regarding safety at sea in both the 'Erika I' and 'Erika II' proposals.
The phasing out of single-hull oil tankers will increase safety along EU coasts.
My friends in the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism remarked that stricter EU phase-out dates should be adopted.
I thank my colleagues for this responsible approach and I urge agreement to be reached on the earlier drop-dead date of 2015.
When we do this we should always remember that double hulls or even triple hulls do not guarantee with absolute certainty that accidents will not happen in the future.
Presenting new technologies and making improvements to the vessel design are part of this important work.
As regards the Commission decision yesterday to stick with the previously agreed timetable regarding the state aid schemes I think that was a wise decision.
Like my very good friend Mrs Langenhagen I am very worried about the situation in South Korea and I was glad to see that the European Commission will review this issue before May next year.
Madam President, when the Erika sank, it was the fault of the ship' s age, the single hull, the Indian crew and the Maltese flag.
When the Ievoli Sun sank, it was relatively young, it had a double hull, a crew from the European Community and it was flying the Italian flag.
It is enough to confuse anybody! Our citizens understand even less well.
I believe that our reports contain a weakness, in that they do not sufficiently discuss the seafarers and the men on board ship.
More than 80 of accidents are associated with human error, but there are reasons for human error, which are social in nature.
Naturally, the training of the crews is important, but it must be checked and this can only be carried out by the port state.
Inspectors must check not only the condition of the ship but also the shipboard social conditions.
Is Convention 147 of the ILO which, amongst other things, obliges port states to reinforce measures aimed at protecting the interests of seamen in terms of their health and safety, their working conditions and their union rights, being correctly enforced?
As for the Paris Memorandum of Understanding, I believe it would be useful to amend it in such a way as to make inspections of the shipboard social conditions systematic and effective.
I believe that the issue of maritime safety will not be over until we have talked about the seamen.
Madam President, firstly, as regards urgency in taking decisions and in implementing these decisions, bearing in mind that less than a year after the Erika incident we had the Ievoli Sun accident, how is it possible not to understand our electors, our fellow citizens, when they ask how this could have happened?
I have heard Members of Parliament ask why action was not taken sooner.
While I can understand this question, I believe that we must realise that, in this area, perhaps as never before, Parliament, the Commission and the Council did indeed display a willingness to act and to react speedily.
One can even assume that this initiative creates conditions not only for the European Union to adopt perfectly effective measures regarding the waters that concern it directly, but also measures to enable the IMO itself, as it were, to bring all these measures up to a fully global level within the coming months.
I remember - and please forgive me for using this personal tone - that last February we sent the three memoranda to the European Union, to FIPOL and to the IMO.
This was done on France' s initiative because the Erika had just sunk and, since March, the Commission has put forward a number of proposals.
From the very first meeting, under the French Presidency of the Council of Transport Ministers, there has been a common will to so something.
Today, as well as moving forward the date of the debate in part-session, the European Parliament is proposing to debate and to give its verdict in three key areas.
This specifically demonstrates that, this time, we will not fall once again into the ruts of the past.
It has to be said that in the twenty years after the Amoco Cadiz accident some things were perhaps achieved, but not enough to prevent this lack of maritime safety from being eradicated.
I want to highlight the work that has been done at this level and I share the opinion of your rapporteurs, the quality of whose work I also commend.
I am convinced, as are the Members of the European Parliament, that we must strengthen the texts proposed by the Commission, especially regarding black boxes and banning ships.
I am also in favour of the liability of all operators, in particular that of classification societies, which play a key role in maritime safety, being established and clearly reinforced so that no lenience can exist, most notably as regards inspections.
I want to say to Mr Jarzembowski that the Council is not seeking a compromise.
We must move forward towards consensus upon maximum maritime regulation and safety.
It is not a question of a compromise between those who would like more and those who would like less.
There is common ground and we must seek the consensus to achieve it.
As regards maritime safety and 'cheating' there is no compromise to be sought regarding the elements of inspection and maritime safety.
If you agree, Parliament, the Commission and the Council must work, by consensus, between now and the Council of Ministers on 20 and 21 December.
I have indeed heard this suggestion made by several rapporteurs.
This is the proposal I am putting to you officially right now.
I hope that this work can result in common positions being established as early as 20 and 21 December.
I am not yet at a stage where I need to talk about conciliation. We can expedite matters.
If we work from now until the Council of Ministers on 20 and 21 December, we will succeed in establishing common positions, obtained by qualified majority voting.
This is an element I wish to stress as Parliament will then be able to accept these positions in second reading early next year.
It is true that the subjects we are dealing with are sometimes complex and technical.
I realise that even the translations take time.
But the most important thing is the unshakeable will which must motivate us collectively to change the current rules of the game of maritime transport in order to establish maritime safety.
These proposals which, I hope, we are going to push forward together very quickly, both as regards the phasing out of single-hull ships and the issue of classification societies and port state control, are important, but, as you have said, and as the Commissioner has also said, we know that they are not enough.
We need this second package in order to go further in terms of making all the operators aware of their responsibilities.
We also need to step up surveillance and transparency.
One Member of Parliament used the term 'traceability' .
I would support that idea.
We cannot allow operators to do just what they like with ships, especially when they have been repaired or banned in such and such a place.
We must not find them back on our seas and on our oceans.
The Equasis system, which is part of the second package, will enable us to push things forward.
Finally, Madam President, a number of you have spoken about this, but we do not as yet have all the elements of the inquiry that I set up in the wake of the loss of the Ievoli Sun.
The fact is that this ship was not old, it had a double hull and its crew was from Europe.
We will get the results of this inquiry shortly.
It is important that everybody knows what happened, as the human question, which was brought up by a number of you, is also very important.
Things are happening in terms of the overexploitation of seamen and shipboard living and working conditions, as well as in terms of maintenance, which may be determining factors in the cause of accidents, and I believe we must move forward in this area too.
Madam President, I first would like to thank you all for this interesting and valuable debate.
I am glad to say that the Commission will support many of the amendments put forward in these three reports.
There still remain some areas where we have somewhat different approaches. But I hope that these can be cleared today.
Allow me to give the Commission' s view on each of the reports on the three proposals.
I would like to start with the proposal on port state control.
I thank Parliament for its strong commitment to our proposal and especially Mr Watts for his series of amendments which sends a clear and strong message to sub-standard operators and negligent flag states.
Most of the amendments are focused on the proposed refusal of access to Community waters.
These are Amendments Nos 1, 3, 6, 7 and 8.
The core of Parliament' s amendments is Amendment No 3, amending Article 7a of the Commission proposal.
It includes three elements: firstly, the deletion of the age criterion is acceptable to the Commission since there is no absolute correlation between age and the quality of a ship.
Secondly, regarding the criterion based on the absence of a black box on board, the Commission supports the principle of a widened accelerated introduction of black boxes on board ships plying EU ports, but this is a matter which should not be dealt with in the port state control Directive.
So this is not a matter of principle but a matter of the formal place for this specific proposal.
The port state control Directive is designed to check compliance with international requirements and not to introduce new rules.
Within a few days the Commission will adopt a proposal for a Directive on safety of navigation including such an obligation to be equipped with a black box.
The third element of Amendment No 3 is a proposal to ban all ships that have flown for three years the flag of a state included in the blacklist published by the Paris Memorandum of Understanding.
In Parliament' s proposal, this criterion alone would be decisive to ban whole fleets.
Should the directive enter into force today with the proposed amendment of Parliament, 32 fleets including Malta, Cyprus, Russia, Panama, the largest fleet of the world, would be banned.
This means thousands of ships including ships of high quality which is contrary to the objectives of port state control.
We prefer our proposal where the flag criterion is linked to the detention record of a ship so as to give a clear and strong signal to sub-standard operators.
In brief, the Commission can only partially accept Amendment No 3.
Amendments Nos 1, 6, 7 and 8 also relate to the refusal of access.
The Commission can accept Amendment Nos 6, 7 and 8, but can only partially accept Amendment No 1.
The deletion of the age criterion is acceptable but not the extension of banning the territorial waters of Member States.
This is not reflected in the text of the directive where the refusal of access only concerns EU ports.
As regards the other amendments, the Commission can accept Amendments Nos 2, 4, 5, 21, 22, 23 and 24 subject to some redrafting.
The Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 9 to 20, Amendment Nos 25 and 26.
Most are new proposed recitals that do not reflect the contents of the directive.
Many are either outside the scope of the port state control or are already covered by this or another directive.
More specifically, Amendments Nos 9 to 17 and 25 introduce new recitals most of which are not linked in any way to the text of the directive.
Amendment No 18 introduces port state control in relation to the seafarers' rest period, however the enforcement of the provisions in respect of seafarers' hours of work is already fully covered by existing Directive 99/95.
Amendment No 19 is redundant since the current procedures already provide that non-compliance with the required health and working standards as established by ILO conventions are reported as deficiencies and can also lead to the detention of a vessel.
Amendment No 20 is irrelevant to port state control as it concerns competition between ports of the Atlantic and North Sea and not maritime safety.
Amendment No 26 reflects the amendments of banding proposed by the rapporteur in Amendment No 3 but extends the scope of the measure to the exclusive economic zone of Member States and in this light it is contrary to the law of the sea.
Let me now turn to the proposal for the accelerated phasing in of double-hull oil tankers.
I am happy to say that we almost entirely agree.
Following pressure by Member States on the International Maritime Organisation, there is a proposed phase-out schedule which meets the main concerns of Europe and at the same time aligns with the American Oil Pollution Act 90 and which is to be fully supported.
In this respect, the Commission insists on 2015 as the final end date.
In order to achieve the main objective of this proposal, namely to phase out old single-hull oil tankers quickly, we are prepared to go along with the deletion of the proposed financial incentive system setting up differential charging of port and pilotage dues.
It is expected that the IMO will formally adopt the phase out schedule at its April meeting next year.
However, should the International Maritime Organisation fail to do so, the Commission agrees with Parliament that we will have to adopt a EU regulation based on the EP text and introduce a system for European Union waters.
Amendment No 12 of the report says exactly the same, but it is more of a political commitment than a legal text.
Therefore, we do not need it in the final text and I hope you will not insist on this point.
For similar reasons, the Commission cannot accept the new Amendment No 22 which relates to the very important area of safety of navigation but is of no relevance to the proposed regulation.
The Commission also rejects Amendments Nos 10 and 18 since this would mean setting up an additional committee just for this regulation and this is inconsistent with our policy line of reducing the number of committees by making use of existing committees.
I am happy to see that the rapporteur has introduced a reference in Amendment No 21 to the condition assessment scheme and we agree with the main thrust of the approach suggested but there is need for some fine tuning of the wording to make it clearer.
Last but not least, the proposal for amendments to the classification societies Directive.
Here again, there is no great divergence of views and the Commission can accept Amendments Nos 6, 12, 14, 15 and 8 with the exception of the additional Paragraphs 3a and 3b to that amendment.
There is a set of amendments which the Commission feels could create confusion because they introduce new terminology in an area where the language of the international fora, IMO, is well established.
I am referring to Amendments Nos 2, 3, 7 and 9 and the Commission feels that these are not really substantial problems, more drafting language matters which could possibly be cleared by the jurist-linguists.
The issue of assessments to be carried out over the classification societies by the Member States on the one hand and by the Commission on the other is of primary importance.
The objectives of Parliament and the Commission are the same.
We must maintain the clear difference in substance of the tasks at hand for either party.
Member States must satisfy themselves that the classification society they have chosen to work on their behalf, fulfils the tasks to their full satisfaction.
The Commission' s task is to confirm that the classification society continues to meet the qualitative criteria in the directive and to monitor the performance of the classification societies.
In that respect, the control tasks of Member States and the Commission are different and should not be undertaken at the same time.
This is why the Commission would favour Amendment No 28 now on the table which reintroduces the obligation for Member States to carry out their assessment and therefore rejects Amendment No 13.
Ethics is an equally important issue that should be tackled.
I share Parliament' s concern that there should be no undue influence from a shipowner over a classification society.
In this respect, Amendments Nos 26 and 29 are making clarifications of the text in their Spanish versions and would be acceptable to the Commission.
Amendment No 4 and part of Amendment No 18 relating to point "K" are not acceptable.
There are some other amendments which the Commission has difficulties in accepting mainly on the grounds that we feel that the concerns expressed have already been sufficiently taken care of in other parts of the existing text.
Here I have in mind Amendments Nos 5, 16 and the additions 3a and 3b to Amendment No 8: 3a because we feel this is adequately covered in Article 9 and 10 and 3b because this is covered in the Directive on port state control.
Further, Amendment No 1 and part of Amendment No 18 relating to point "K" are not acceptable on legal grounds.
Amendment No 1 because only the Community is a legal person and not the Union and 18 "K" as it may contravene horizontal commitments made in the general agreement on trade in services.
Amendment No 11 and a part of Amendment No 18 relating to point "H" which deal with the issue of setting clear performance targets and indicators for classification societies are rather ambiguous.
They seem to suggest limitations which are unacceptable and should be rejected.
The aim of our proposal is to allow for a tightening of supervision of classification societies and the possibility to suspend or withdraw recognition in situations where the performance of a classification society is not up to standard.
In this respect, the Commission cannot accept any limitation or involvement of classification societies in the judgment over themselves.
As regards Amendments Nos 19 to 25, I am afraid none of them is acceptable either because they are already covered in the existing directive or simply fall outside the scope of this directive and are covered by other directives.
That leaves Amendment No 10 dealing with the important issue of liability limits.
The Commission appreciates the support for its originally proposed limit.
Also, the Commission agrees with the revision clause but would prefer the more flexible formula suggested in Amendment No 12, commitology, over that in Amendment No 10, full legislative procedure.
I have two comments on issues raised by Mr Stenmarck about oil spills in the Baltic Sea.
We have two instruments at hand.
Firstly there is a Directive on waste reception facilities recently approved by the European Parliament and Council.
All ships are obliged to discharge waste in European Union ports.
Secondly, in our proposal on 'Erika II' concerning surveillance of navigation, Member States will be required to intervene even on the high seas in such cases.
I would say to Mrs Peijs about Cambodia and Honduras ships, that we are perfectly aware of the threat to safety and these are precisely the kinds of flags targeted in our proposal on the port state Directive.
I can assure you that if a shipowner thinks of registering a ship on these registers, he should think twice after our proposal.
May I conclude by expressing once again my gratitude to Parliament and to the four rapporteurs for their expeditious work and excellent reports.
It is a curious coincidence that Parliament is considering the final stage of the adoption of the European Parliament and Council decision on accidental or deliberate marine pollution, at the same time as the first set of measures proposed by the Commission following the Erika disaster.
Indeed, even with the best preventative legislation, zero risk does not exist.
We are sometimes struggling against the forces of nature.
In order to be better prepared against maritime disasters, this decision has established a solid framework for cooperation at Community level.
It creates the conditions that will allow the sharing of experience gathered by Member States to better protect our marine environment against the risk of accidental or deliberate pollution.
The conciliation process was demanding, but a well-balanced compromise has been found and the amendments of Parliament and Council have produced a better decision.
The scope and content of the decision are now clearer, in particular concerning operational discharges and munitions as well as regarding the link with international conventions or in relation to the polluter-pays principle.
This has largely been due to the excellent work of the European Parliament and the rapporteur, Mrs McKenna, whom I would particularly like to thank along with the Members of Parliament' s delegation.
Let me conclude by recalling that one month ago the Ievoli Sun sank near Cherbourg with 6 000 tonnes of dangerous cargo.
Once again, this demonstrates how urgent the adoption of strengthened, preventative and restoratory Community measures for the protection of our seas is.
We now count on the Council and, of course, Mr Gayssot personally to crown this remarkable work with our good, solid, ambitious agreement during the next Council.
Thank you, Mrs Wallström.
Commissioner, no one in this Chamber was getting impatient as you were speaking. Quite the contrary, we are very grateful that you have taken so much care to set out the Commission' s positions in such detail.
I once again thank the President-in-Office of the Council for what he had to say and for the very great determination that he expressed.
Mr Poos, would you like to add something to the debate?
I wish to raise a point of order, Madam President.
The Commissioner spoke for 18 minutes and during this time she cited dozens and dozens of items and gave a breakdown of the position of the Commission.
It is impossible for Members of Parliament to take note of the Commission' s position on the different amendments.
That is why I would like to reiterate my proposal that the Commission' s position on the amendments is sent to all the Members of Parliament in writing before we cast our vote.
Very well. I am sure the Commissioner heard what you had to say.
I am told there is no objection to that, Mr Poos.
Madam President, this is a point of order concerning Rule 44.
As we have heard on several occasions, the Council persists in not taking the deadlines for replying to our questions into consideration.
Instead of supplying a written, priority reply in three weeks, they took 16 weeks to send this one.
Anyway, I should like to read out this very brief reply: "The first four questions raised have never been submitted to the Council; as for the last three questions, these clearly fall within the organisational competences of the General Secretariat."
You can understand that there might be an incompetent and provocative official, but when 15 countries give their assent to this kind of answer, Madam President, I think you should take the initiative when you meet the Council to have this prerogative of Members of Parliament respected.
Mr Turco, I have understood what you had to say and I will give the matter some thought.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place in a few moments.
VOTE
Thank you, Mr Hatzidakis.
Motion for a resolution on the preparation of the Nice European Council
Madam President, please allow me briefly to explain our reasons for withdrawing the resolution.
We are withdrawing the resolution since its content has been reproduced almost in full and to the letter in the joint resolution signed by the Chairmen of the main political groups.
I note with satisfaction that this acknowledges the high quality of the end-result arrived at on 21 November by the Committee on Constitutional Affairs on the basis of a transparent and balanced compromise between the various positions.
While withdrawing the resolution, however, I express the conviction that this Parliament would have made its voice heard better if, in anticipation of the Council of Nice, it had devoted a specific and separate resolution to these important and difficult topics of the Intergovernmental Conference, instead of dealing with them in a single resolution that also embraces all the other points on the Council agenda.
That was what the Committee over which I currently preside had proposed in carrying out its mandate, consistent with Parliament' s action on the eve of the Amsterdam Council in 1997 and on other similar occasions before that.
I believe, Madam President, that the powers and initiatives of our parliamentary committees ought not to be constrained.
Thank you, Mr Napolitano.
The motion for a resolution from the Committee on Constitutional Affairs is therefore withdrawn.
Joint motion for a resolution on the preparation of the Nice European Council
(Parliament adopted the resolution)
Report (A5-0340/2000) by Mr Brok, on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy, on the progress achieved in the implementation of the common foreign and security policy
Relating to Amendment No 2:
Madam President, I should like to move that the amendment be altered so that it begins with the words "urges, in this respect, the Council and the Commission".
The words "and the Commission" would be inserted, and the last clause, "urges once again the Commission to open a representation office in Taipei" would be deleted.
If the author of the amendment agrees, we could proceed in that way.
Madam President, in the Foreign Affairs Committee this week we suffered a physical intrusion into our debates which stopped our debates three times.
We now know that this intrusion happened at the invitation of certain members of this Parliament.
Would Madam President apologise to our guests, the Turkish Foreign Minister Mr Cem and his Ambassador Mr Akiyol, and would Madam President remonstrate strongly with those Members who deliberately arranged the demonstration today as it was a travesty of our normal Parliamentary hospitality and could have led to physical harm.
The President has already said that she regretted this incident and has apologised to our guests.
Secondly, the Secretary-General is going to draw up a report to establish what in fact happened, so that a remedy can be found.
EXPLANATIONS OF VOTE - Ghilardotti report (A5-0341/2000)
. The rapporteur is correct in identifying the local dimension in terms of strengthening European employment strategy.
Local authorities, SMEs and NGOs must be involved in any strategy to create employment as they are in close contact with the situation at ground level and can provide the expertise to make a success of local employment strategies.
I support the idea of designating a European Local Development year and welcome the idea of maximising the use of new technology to reduce unemployment.
Employment creation must remain one of our top priorities.
McKenna report (A5-0336/2000)
Madam President, I have voted for the McKenna report, which, together with the Conciliation Committee, marks the conclusion of the Community framework for intervening in the matter of marine pollution.
I have talked to retired seamen, who tell me that they are all in favour of this programme, especially because it is a European programme aimed at keeping the seas clean.
They also say that they know Europe and have had personal experience of it all their lives because many ships have mixed crews, with Italian, French, English and Spanish members, and so they are really happy that Europe as a whole is interested in keeping European seas clean.
Watts report (A5-0343/2000)
Madam President, as the representative of the Pensioners' Party I voted against the Watts report.
I voted against in protest at the fact that the European Union is still not managing to intervene in this matter as it should.
In fact, those concerned with enforcing shipboard living and working conditions, as the title of this report states, are unable to lay down that seamen who go to sea are, throughout Europe, entitled to receive their pensions and end their working lives earlier than other people.
Many seamen are grandfathers and do not see their grandchildren because they are always at sea; fathers do not see their own children.
In short, this job is different from others and entails many more sacrifices than other jobs.
Therefore it is fair that they should be entitled, if they wish, to take their pensions before other workers.
. (EL) Accidents at sea, marine pollution, unacceptable health and safety conditions on board ships and the over-exploitation of crews are simply expressions of the criminal unaccountability of big shipowners and the policies which serve them at national, regional and international level.
The EU's policy merely maintains and extends this unaccountability, given that even the inadequate protective measures decided under pressure from the grass-roots movement will never be applied.
Regional decisions on safety at sea seriously undermine the role of the International Maritime Organisation (ÉÌÏ) and the economic war being waged exerts a constant downward pressure on safety regulations, which are sacrificed to profit.
At the same time, big shipowners ply their trade uncontrolled under flags of convenience and the state of world shipping goes from bad to worse.
The unaccountability of shipowners is being bolstered by the privatisation of shipping registers, which shipowners now control, and by the lack of any basic inspection controls or other form of involvement on the part of government authorities.
We urgently need to take preventative action for ships flying under the flag of Member States of the European Union, to improve existing legislation and, more importantly, to ensure that it is applied.
We need to change the system of shipping registers by moving them from the private to the public sector.
We also need to extend seaworthiness surveys and inspections by the competent authorities to ships of any nationality sailing in the territorial waters of the Member States and to promote similar measures at international level under resolutions by the ÉÌÏ, paying particular attention and applying particularly strict measures to ships sailing under flags of convenience.
Merchant ships need to be inspected by government departments with suitably trained staff and proper technological facilities, with the active involvement of the shipping trade union movement.
A real policy to protect safety at sea, human life at sea and the environment needs, first and foremost, to address the unaccountability of shipowners, apply strict measures to punish their infringements, stipulate how ships are to be crewed in keeping with their enhanced requirements, help to improve living and working conditions on board ship and ensure that the trade union movement is properly involved when decisions are taken on shipping, especially on safety issues.
Although the proposal to amend the current Directive on ship inspections and the Watts report fall far short of what is actually required, they are a step in the right direction and the MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece have therefore voted in favour of the report.
- (FR) First of all, I would like to pay tribute to our rapporteur and to the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, for the diligence they have shown and for their remarkable work on such a serious and crucial issue.
Not only has our Parliament accelerated the legislative procedure, which was to be expected, but it has also succeeded in staying at the forefront in matters of safety by putting across principles it has recognised for a long time.
The fact is that, on three accounts, Mark Watts has managed to reinforce the measure envisaged by the Commission:
Not only must ships which have been detained more than twice in the course of the preceding 24 months in a port of a Member State be barred from sailing but, in the opinion our Parliament, this should apply irrespective of the age of the vessel.
Ships that have flown the flag of a blacklisted state for 3 consecutive years shall be barred from sailing in the waters under the jurisdiction of the Member States.
This is aimed at dissuading states issuing these types of flags of convenience and shipowners from having recourse to this illegal practice.
A black box shall be installed on board ship.
A ship that does not have a black box will in future be refused access to Community ports.
Public opinion is waiting for us to act and is impatient for our vote.
We have not accelerated the procedure only to hold it up at the finish line through conciliation with the Council, which would be spread out over several months.
The risks of accidents and pollution are too great, to say nothing of shipboard working conditions and the wages of the seamen.
Let us demonstrate our drive and energy and let us vote in favour of this progressive report.
This will be to our credit and preserve our environment, and hence give us a better quality of life.
- (NL) If all the flag states for shipping, all the shipowning companies and all the classification societies had good will, there would be no need for port state controls.
Unfortunately, making maximum profit is often all that matters, to the detriment of safety, the environment and the personnel.
Human error largely results from overloading, underpayment and the fact that the sailors have not received adequate training.
The Commission proposal looks reassuring, but is not proof against deliberate sabotage.
I therefore welcome the fact that the rapporteurs Watts, Vachetta and Piétrasanta have endeavoured to close the gaps still present in the Commission proposal.
They propose that ships which pose a risk or sail under cheap flags and those lacking voyage recorder data should be banned from EU ports, that we should counteract brass-plate companies, stop ships rinsing out their tanks in the sea, and increase the number of inspectors.
It is significant that Mrs Vachetta has proposed that the level of manpower, the working hours, the pay levels and the training of sailors should be improved.
I support any improvements and am disappointed that some of them will not get a majority vote behind them even now.
. (FR) I voted in favour of the Watts report, which aims to enhance the quality and frequency of inspections in the ports of the Member States of the European Union.
The European Commission proposes to introduce a certain uniformity of inspection procedures and sets out the conditions under which access to the ports of the Member States of the European Union can be refused: these are the minimum conditions for a common policy on maritime safety.
These provisions have the effect of strengthening safety checks on ships in our ports but do not make it possible to ban dangerous ships that do not drop anchor at one of our ports from sailing in our territorial waters.
The limitations of these proposals are therefore clear.
One can therefore deplore the fact that the Commission proposal has not taken up the idea of the establishment of a European surveillance body on the model of the coastguards in the United States.
We will settle for setting up a European system of surveillance and information exchange between Member States.
The European Parliament will have to ensure that the financial and human resources that are needed to effectively establish this rapid reaction and information exchange system are quickly made available by the Member States.
I would point out that the European Union has some 270 inspectors charged with state port control.
This figure falls far short of the number of inspectors needed to implement the measures we are proposing in ports.
The rapporteur has put forward a number of proposals enhancing the binding nature and effectiveness of these inspections.
I fully support the ban on navigation for ships which have been detained twice in the course of the preceding 2 years, irrespective of the age of the ship.
However, I believe that this measure should be considered a minimum requirement and I hope that we will be able to go much further.
To do so, we must be sure that the measures we are proposing today are implemented by all the Member States of the European Union.
The responsibility for putting these measures in place rests therefore with the Member States.
Without additional inspectors and without extra financial resources, the controls proposed in the ports will remain a fiction.
We therefore call on the Member States to make a real commitment to maritime safety.
Hatzidakis report (A5-0344/2000)
A pensioner to whom I mentioned that this document by Mr Hatzidakis was going to be discussed exclaimed, 'But couldn' t you have thought of that before?!' .
This really is such an obvious measure, and I see Mr Hatzidakis as the deus ex machina of this need to avoid marine pollution hazards.
If we had thought of it before, if Mr Hatzidakis had been here before, in previous years, he would surely have proposed the double-hull design and we would have avoided so many disasters.
I now ask Mr Hatzidakis to become the promoter of another initiative, to have double shells adopted also for the road tankers that carry oil and other harmful substances on our motorways.
(EL) We will not achieve safety at sea or protect human life at sea and the environment unless we address the unaccountability of shipowners, introduce strict controls on the state of ships, impose heavy penalties on shipping companies in breach of safety regulations, improve working times for seamen, train them properly and ensure that ships are crewed in keeping with their enhanced requirements.
Introducing double-hull ships may help improve safety and protect the environment, but it is not a panacea, nor is it a guarantee, on its own, of seaworthiness.
We feel that a differential charging system for port and pilotage dues for double-hull oil tankers should not be introduced at the expense of the revenue of the port and other funds to which dues are currently channelled; on the contrary, dues for double-hull ships should be maintained at present levels and gradually increased for single-hull ships.
Unfortunately, not only do the proposals in the report make no such provision, they also worsen the preconditions for withdrawing old ships.
We feel that the proposal to increase the tonnage of vessels below the MARPOL limit which are exempt from the provisions of the Commission regulation from 600 to 3 000 TDW will increase the number of ships with the potential to jeopardise safety and environmental protection.
Most of these ships are used in busy shipping areas.
For these reasons, the MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece voted against the report.
- (NL) It would be better if there were no single-hull tankers any longer, but such ships were still being built up until 1996.
The Commission is right to want to stop Europe lagging behind America.
We must not allow single-hull tankers to carry on sailing in our waters when they are no longer present elsewhere after 2005, 2010 or 2015.
If we do not implement the necessary measures in good time we will end up with the old, high-risk ships that have been sent for scrap in the States in our own waters.
Double-hull tankers reduce the risk of oil pollution, but do not rule it out.
In particular, in recent years there has been a dramatic increase in tanker and fast passenger ship traffic in the Baltic Sea off Estonia and Russia.
The risk of ships crashing into each other is so great there that without extra supervision and inspections, shipping accidents are becoming increasingly likely.
There is therefore every reason to tighten up the Commission proposal, just as the rapporteurs for the other reports on safety at sea that are on the agenda today have done.
Unfortunately, rapporteur Hatzidakis has done the opposite.
He fears a shortage of tankers and would rather wait for internationally agreed measures.
I support the Commission proposal.
However, the ways in which it has been toned down make it inadequate.
. (FR) To unravel the chain of responsibility, to respect shipboard social standards, to re-establish the 'polluter-pays' principle and to innovate in the field of equipment must be our top priorities.
In this context, making the construction of double-hull vessels, especially those used to transport toxic and/or dangerous goods, more widespread as quickly as possible is a useful measure.
Europe must not be out of step with regulations in the United States which, thanks to the Oil Pollution Act of 1990, aim to phase out single-hull vessels between 2000 and 2015.
We must at least keep pace with the United States while adopting measures not to shift the activities of the whole fleet of coffin ships towards third-world countries.
Moreover, replacing the outdated ships is a means of giving a fresh boost to shipbuilding.
We must envisage improving the system of double hulls.
Many technical experts have pointed out the difficulties encountered when inspecting the space between the two hulls and during its maintenance.
Yet Mr Hatzidakis makes proposals which restrict the scope of the Commission proposals.
As he explained, they aim to enhance maritime safety while respecting the system of competition or, in other words, the quest for the lowest cost.
In short, what is being proposed is to eliminate the lack of maritime safety without attacking its causes.
This draft directive is moving in the right direction, but we must reject all exemptions and delays in implementation.
We must stick with the Commission proposal.
(FR) I am delighted that the European Parliament has finally been able to give its verdict on the three texts relating to maritime safety but I deplore the excessively long delay in achieving one of the priorities of the French Presidency of the European Union.
The loss of the Erika, which occurred in December 1999, put the issue of maritime safety on the Community' s political agenda and it was due to pressure from the European Parliament that the European Commission proposed the texts we voted on today, almost a year after the accident.
It took a second maritime disaster, the wreck of the Ievoli Sun, to accelerate the first reading of these texts.
I voted in favour of Mr Hatzidakis' s report and I would naturally like to congratulate the rapporteur on persevering with such a sensitive issue.
The mandatory double hull for oil tankers and the progressive phasing out of the oldest ships are measures which go in the right direction and are a practical response to the legitimate concerns of our citizens.
The lengthy transitional period during which single-hull vessels will still be able to sail is to be regretted, however, even though the scope of the measure is such as to justify the gradual rate of their withdrawal.
We must pay the greatest attention to amendments to the timetable for withdrawing the oldest ships which may be proposed by the Council.
In all eventualities, the ultimate deadline of 2015 must be respected.
The fact is that the unilateral decision taken by the United States to ban single-hull oil tankers from calling at American ports after 2015 poses a real threat to maritime traffic passing through EU waters, where these ships are likely to ply their trade.
It is therefore crucial that the timetable for eliminating these ships from our seas must be in line with the American timetable.
Finally, we must not forget that the mandatory double hull for oil tankers can be but a single element in a genuine European policy of maritime safety.
This decision is important but it does not go far enough.
Promoting more stringent regulations at an international level must continue to be the fundamental objective of our maritime safety policy.
Watts report (A5-0343/2000) and Hatzidakis report (A5-0344/2000)
. The Erika and other recent oil spills form a continuing catalogue of disasters that have taken place in Community waters, including the Braer spill off Shetland and the Sea Empress of Wales.
These catastrophes in addition to causing irreparable ecological damage have devastated local industries.
In the case of the Erika, the local fishing and aquaculture industries suffered a bitter blow and it is important not just to look at the harmful effects that are apparent in the immediate aftermath, but also to look ahead at the long-term detrimental effects of oil pollution.
Effective compensation is essential.
It is time that shipping safety within the Community was tightened up and that greater controls were introduced, including bringing an end to the use of flags of convenience which is also increasingly resorted to.
The companies responsible, the ship and the cargo owners must pay up for their negligence.
Current compensation funds have been inadequately funded and this was all too apparent in the case of the Braer disaster where the Shetland Islands fishing industry was inadequately compensated for its losses.
Maritime disasters are usually followed by flurries of political activity which sound reassuring at the time but which have not always been followed through.
Let us ensure that adequate measures are instigated throughout Europe and that lessons learned lead to decisive political action.
- (SV) The package of legislative proposals concerning safety at sea is welcome and necessary.
This has been demonstrated, not least, by the catastrophe involving the loss of the oil tanker Erika.
I have voted in favour of the reports on:
a. ship safety, pollution prevention and shipboard living and working conditions in respect of shipping using Community ports,
b. double hulls for oil tankers,
c. nature and performance of ship inspection,
d. accidental or deliberate marine pollution.
In addition, I have voted for all the amendments that improve and tighten up the Commission' s proposals.
It is particularly important that it is made clear that the polluter-pays principle must apply in full.
In recent years there has been a noticeable increase in the number of oil tankers in the Atlantic, the English Channel and the Baltic, as well as elsewhere, which also means an increased risk of accidents with a negative impact on the environment.
Oil tanker traffic in the Baltic may now increase dramatically, since Russia is planning a number of oil ports along the Baltic coast, in the Gulf of Finland, in something approaching a major concentration of the Russian oil industry.
In the town of Primorski, not far from Viborg, the building of a major oil port for the export of Russian oil has already commenced and a further port is planned in the same area.
Supported by the Environment Directorate of the Commission, Finland has attempted to get the Russian authorities to perform an environmental impact assessment in accordance with the Espoo Convention.
Unfortunately Russia has not responded to this request.
An oil accident would have destructive consequences for the Finnish Gulf and the Baltic.
The Baltic is a very vulnerable inland sea, already highly polluted by discharges from industry, sewerage and agriculture.
The Commission and the Council must now follow up the request for environmental impact assessments (EIAs) and put it to the Russian authorities that all future oil trade with Russia will be conditional upon an EIA.
Ortuondo Larrea report (A5-0342/2000)
Madam President, I have already mentioned that I have been to sea in the past.
This measure by Mr Ortuondo Larrea, regulating inspections and control visits to ships, is extremely important, just as all inspections and controls are important.
I remember when the inspectors of the states that had to check the ship came on board.
They would shut themselves in a cabin with the chief purser and come out loaded with cigarettes, bottles of spirits and maybe other things too.
Inspections are serious business!
I believe we should try to get European inspectors to go on board European ships, because this habit of governments and the Council of refusing inspections must come to an end, especially in this activity of cleaning up the sea and our coastlines.
. (FR) We have one maritime disaster after another, all following the same pattern.
After the wrecks of the Erika and the Ievoli Sun, which recently affected the shorelines of France, it is time that the European Union reacted and took firm control of the classification societies which authorise coffin ships to sail.
It is against this background that European legislation is vital.
This report, which aims to improve the control of ships and to establish harmonised procedures and rules of inspection must therefore be supported, as it is a step forward, even though, in our opinion, the rapporteur' s approach does not go far enough.
The fact is that, whilst he provides for the harmonisation of inspection criteria for all Member States, nothing is envisaged for ships from third countries inspected outside the European Union.
What is there to prevent, for example, a Maltese or a Cypriot ship in poor condition from sailing close to our shorelines.
When will the European Union finally take the decision to ban access to its territorial waters to any ship that does not comply with the rules it promulgates?
Will Europe, normally so swift to legislate on environmental issues, continue to ignore maritime safety because colossal financial interests are at stake and because the interests of its Members differ?
When will the European Union free up the human and financial resources commensurate with the task at hand so that this text does not remain a simple declaration of intent?
We will vote in favour of this report, which goes in the right direction, whilst at the same time deploring what it fails to do: to determine the precise liability of the polluters (inspectors, shipowners, charterers, insurers); to introduce preventative and penalty measures to fight against intensive tank cleaning, which is responsible for most marine pollution; to draw up a blacklist of coffin ships, and to refuse access to EU territorial waters to any ship posing a significant threat, irrespective of age.
The revision of Directive 94/57/EC is becoming a matter of some urgency, especially since Malta and Cyprus, the fourth and sixth largest fleets worldwide respectively, are candidates for accession to the European Union.
This Community action must be accompanied by the reactivation of the IMO which, endowed with genuine police power to enforce the International Safety Management Code, would be an effective instrument on a par with Interpol.
We hope that the Council will assume its responsibilities speedily.
The quality of our environment is at stake.
. (FR) The recent wreck of the oil tanker, Erika, and the chemical tanker, the Ievoli Sun, have revealed the importance of the role played by classification societies in maritime transport.
And we have a legitimate reason to question the reliability and the effectiveness of the inspections they carry out.
First of all, recognition of classification societies is devolved to Member States without any prior control or harmonisation at European level.
What is more, the training of the inspectors of these societies differs from country to country.
Furthermore, no guarantee is given as to the independence of classification societies vis-à-vis the flag administration and/or the client.
The rapporteur' s proposals aimed at harmonisation on a European scale can only be positive.
The European Union must set aside the resources to make it possible for a recognised and competent authority to enforce standards on classification societies.
Additional financial and human resources will be necessary.
Classification societies will have to be monitored and, where necessary, punished by having their authorisation suspended.
In the event of an accident, the financial liability of recognised organisations must be acknowledged and harmonised.
In addition, the amount of the mentioned compensation must be revised upwards to take better account of the material, economic, but also social and environmental damage inflicted.
I will support this report and the Commission' s amendments, but I call on the Members of Parliament to support the amendments tabled by the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, in particular those aimed at harmonising the rules applicable to classification societies and the status of inspectors.
- (NL) The volume of maritime transport has grown dramatically in recent decades, whilst the cost has gone down.
Ships save on port fees by continuing to sail through stormy weather and by risking fatal accidents at other times too.
As long as it costs less to transgress rules than it does to comply with them, companies that have maximum profits in their sights will carry on making the wrong choices.
The flag states are still incapable of organising the inspection of seagoing ships for seaworthiness and environmental safety for themselves.
They contract this work out to internationally operating companies that are dependent on the favours of shipping companies.
The shipowners that register voluntarily as customers can, if desired, transfer to another bureau whose requirements are less strict.
It is a step in the right direction that the recognition accorded classification societies can be withdrawn, that liability is to be harmonised and that classification societies will always have to transfer their data to the competitor who takes over from them.
It would be better still if inspections were to take place biannually and if classification societies were not permitted to be dependent on one large company alone, which builds, repairs or utilises ships.
But the best result of all would be if harmonised inspections were to become the direct responsibility of the government.
. (FR) The report by Mr Ortuondo Larrea is the final section of the package of measures on maritime safety.
It is an important section as it relates to classification societies.
I voted in favour of this report, which proposes the introduction of a certain uniformity amongst Member States in terms of quality and the expert capabilities of classification societies, whose recognition will henceforth be the preserve of the shared responsibility of the Member Sates and the European Commission.
These proposals also step up the liability of classification societies by providing for financial sanctions and the suspension or withdrawal of their recognition in the event of accidents that may be attributable to them.
The arraignment of the classification societies in the wake of the loss of the Erika in December 1999 recalls their vital role in evaluating and preventing the risks associated with the condition of ships.
The navigable condition of a ship is the responsibility of the state whose flag the ship flies.
I hope the involvement of the European Commission in recognising classification societies and the increased liability of the latter will make it possible to do away with flags of convenience altogether.
From this perspective, these measures must be implemented without delay in the candidate countries, whose fleets must conform to the standards and safety criteria of the European Union.
The problem of classification societies goes far beyond the borders of the European Union.
The European Commission must therefore free up the resources to monitor the enforcement of the new measures by Member States and candidate countries alike.
Finally, our common policy on maritime safety must be an international role model and the obligations we place on our ships must be extended to third-country fleets.
Maritime safety must not simply be an issue arising out of a state of urgency in the wake of each new disaster that hits our shorelines, but the object of an internationally integrated and constant policy.
Preparation for the Nice European Council
Madam President, the Union for a Europe of Nations Group did not endorse the European Parliament resolution on the preparation for the 2000 Nice European Council, since it is inspired totally by the desire to strengthen supranational institutions by applying uniform rules to all Member States.
In particular, we reject calls for a European constitution, at least if it entails the subordination of national constitutions.
We reject the idea of a restrictive Charter of Fundamental Rights being integrated into the Treaties, since it would trigger a formidable spiral of standardisation.
We reject the general extension of qualified majority voting accompanied by the simultaneous extension of codecision and the abolition of the Luxembourg compromise.
If the Nice Council did not reach an agreement on this basis, it would not in our view be a failure, as the federalists claimed yesterday in their attacks on the French Presidency and Mr Védrine.
Rather, it would be a great success, as the Europe we need on the eve of enlargement is not a supranational Europe which is inflexible, hierarchical and remote, but a Europe which is flexible and close to its people, therefore founded in respect for national democracies.
As far as the current Nice agenda is concerned, we believe that the Charter of Fundamental Rights should remain a simple declaration, that the Commission should be composed of one Commissioner for each Member State, that the weighting of votes in the Council should respect the parity of the large States, that majority voting should not be extended to the most important issues, such as immigration, international negotiations on services, taxation and social security and, finally, that specific acts of cooperation should be accepted very liberally, including outside the single institutional framework.
More generally, we believe that, after Nice, further negotiations should be entered into, this time in the right direction, to make the institutions more flexible and to re-establish control by the people, by turning Europe, not into a super state, but into a network of national democracies.
Unlike Mr Berthu, Madam President, the Pensioners' Party, which I have the honour and pleasure to represent in the European Parliament, and I favour a closer link between the States that make up the European Union.
Indeed, I believe that this Parliament in which we sit should be more courageous and act as in the times of the French Revolution: we should turn ourselves into a constituent assembly and one day we should meet in the Salle du Jeu de Paume, and you, Madam President, should be our Robespierre.
Of course, you would become a heroine rather than a hero, and anyway we naturally would not wish the same fate on you as Robespierre met.
What I mean is that the European Union should become a true union of states, with a parliament placed at the centre of lawmaking.
Madam President, whether the European institutions are modified at the Nice European Council or whether rivalries between national ruling circles thwart all attempts at institutional reform, the European Union will continue to be exclusively concerned with the interests of the dominant economic class, with large industrial and financial groups, with their business and their profits.
Notwithstanding a few phrases, as pompous as they are empty, on democracy and on the interests of the people, the debate which is under way within these institutions bears no relation whatsoever to the interests of the working classes and the majority of the population.
We will certainly not be taking part in the bickering between the mouthpieces of the three or four major powers competing for domination of the European Union.
It is of little consequence to us whether the Charter of Fundamental Rights is incorporated into the Treaty on European Union or not, because, in any case, this Charter, allegedly a Charter of Fundamental Rights, not only refuses to include the elementary rights of workers, it actually clears the way for retrograde social measures.
Instead of raising human and social rights to a higher level, the Charter will make it easier to bring them down.
As a result, while abstaining on the details, we have voted against the whole.
- (SV) We are voting in favour of the resolution, but we wish to comment on the following points:
We take a positive position as regards increasing the use of qualified majority voting in the Council of Ministers.
However, we consider that this method of decision making must not include issues that fall under the second pillar.
Where qualified majority voting is used we feel that this must be combined with power of codecision for Parliament.
We wish to lend our support to a reference to the Charter of Fundamental Rights in Article 6.2 of the Treaty.
However, in the present situation we are against incorporation of the Charter into the Treaty and constitutionalisation of the Treaty.
Within foreign and security policy we take a positive view of the fact that crisis management has been given a prominent position.
Provided that the institutions of the EU are given control over the nature of the closer cooperation we would also give this our support.
- (NL) It does not bode well for a successful conclusion to the Nice Summit.
There is no satisfactory agreement in the offing yet.
The increasingly open struggle for power between many Member States is clouding the view in terms of possible compromises.
Quite a number of Member States, particularly the large ones, seem only to be interested in consolidating their own position of power in the future.
The lion' s share of the tabled resolutions show that Parliament too has fallen prey to the temptation to regard the Nice Summit as largely successful because its own authority has been extended.
I have no time for this attitude.
An ambition for power alone is not enough to prepare the European Union for the future.
The very first thing that is needed if we are to have a European Union in which the various nationalities can live peacefully together, is for the governments to seek a sustainable balance, in mutual respect and empathy.
The institutions of the European Union must be in a position to fulfil their tasks without having to step into the shoes of the Member States.
Now, and in the future too, each country must be able to truly show itself to best advantage in a Union based on justice.
I believe that is a crucial criterion by which to judge the Treaty of Nice.
Unfortunately though, I do not see any evidence of this notion in the motions for resolutions.
I am anticipating complete justice in the future realm of the Lord Jesus.
That must not stop us, the people of the European Union, from seeking this justice in the here and now, here on earth.
- (DA) The Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament have today voted in favour of the joint motion for a resolution concerning preparation for the European Council' s meeting between 7 and 9 December in Nice where, among other things, the current Intergovernmental Conference is to be concluded with the signing of the Treaty of Nice.
As we have also made known through the individual votes, we have, throughout the Intergovernmental Conference, been opposed to the much expanded agenda which, by means of repeated motions for resolutions, the majority in the European Parliament has been trying to draw up.
Many of the motions for resolutions tabled by the different political groups are therefore also based upon a deep concern about how much success there will be in achieving the goal in Nice, which is to make the EU ready for admitting the new Member States of the EU.
The most important task in Nice is to ensure that the EU has effective institutions.
As a prerequisite, the solution should involve striking a balance between small and large countries, not only where the weighting of votes in the Council of Ministers is concerned, but also when it comes to the composition of the European Parliament and the Commission.
These two institutions contribute very significantly to the EU' s continuing to concentrate its efforts on the common objectives and cross-border tasks, while the rest is left to the Member States.
Enlargement is a major project requiring backing not only in the applicant States but also in those countries which are already Members.
Many Members of the European Parliament have ambitions to see the Treaties made into a constitution, with the Charter of Fundamental Rights included and qualified majority voting used in all areas.
To keep harping on about these aims, for which there is, in any case, no broad support to be won, during the current Intergovernmental Conference is unwise in our view and will contribute to Parliament' s losing influence.
We have also emphasised this during the individual votes today.
We have chosen to vote in favour of the report as a whole because we wish to put pressure on the Heads of State and Government to achieve a good outcome in Nice.
(FR) On the eve of the Nice Summit and without prejudging the outcome, I want to salute the tremendous work carried out by the French Presidency and the majority of ministers who generously put in the time and effort to address Parliament on a regular basis both in committee and in parliament.
While, like many others, I have at times during this semester regretted that we have heard so little from Prime Minister Jospin himself due to reasons of 'cohabitation' , I am aware of the strong impetus he has always given to his ministers and I should like to state as much.
I especially want to thank Hubert Védrine and Pierre Moscovici, as well as Martine Aubry, who instigated the social calendar, one of the highlights of this presidency.
It now remains to make a success of the Nice Summit and, as regards institutional reform, to persuade each of you to make the final concessions needed to achieve 'a good agreement' and a good Treaty.
It is also important, of course, that we succeed in providing a reference to the Charter of Fundamental Rights in the Treaty itself so as to give it greater legal force.
The importance of the Social Agenda must also be highlighted so that it can be implemented speedily.
A draft Directive on public services, whose urgency is no longer contested, must at last be set in motion.
Just one week away from the Nice Summit I personally have high hopes.
My voting in favour of the resolution, even though I do not agree with the wording in all cases, is an expression of these hopes.
. (SV) In its resolution, the European Parliament, as usual, recommends increased power of codecision for itself.
It would be good if the European Parliament showed just as much enthusiasm for discussing how to go about increasing participation in parliamentary elections to the European Parliament.
In the 1999 election, the participation rate would have been below 40 per cent on average had some Member States not had compulsory voting and had national elections not taken place at the same time as this election.
The enthusiasm that the European Parliament shows for increased power of codecision in the EU is not something that has a strong foundation amongst the electorate.
The democratic debate in Europe today is based on the national parliamentary elections in each Member State.
To create a more democratic EU the national parliaments must be given greater influence in the work of the EU.
(PT) The debate and the resolution adopted by Parliament give serious cause for concern as to what will be decided at the Nice Summit, specifically as regards the potential increase in restrictions on the sovereignty of small countries such as Portugal, the strengthening of federalism and the militaristic path in security and defence policy, and the weak and clearly inadequate measures in the social sphere.
With regard to the Intergovernmental Conference and the subsequent reform of the European institutions, it is particularly serious that moves are being made towards strengthening the power of a small number of large countries to the detriment of the decision-making ability of the great majority of small and medium-sized countries.
This may happen with the extension of qualified majority voting, instances of closer cooperation situated within a hard-core concept, the application of closer cooperation to areas like security and defence policy, the prospect of moving towards a European Constitution based on the Charter of Fundamental Rights, which itself has a content that is restrictive and in several aspects retrograde compared with similar international or national documents, the latter applying to the case of Portugal.
In the social sphere, the proposals are too timid and do not even effectively flesh out the commitments adopted at the Lisbon Summit, particularly as regards the need for strengthening economic and social cohesion.
The Council must, therefore, re-examine its positions and move to oppose the wave of company mergers and concentrations in various sectors, interrupt the current liberalising processes, and change macroeconomic policies with the aim of fighting for quality employment with proper rights and against poverty and social exclusion.
. As a Member of Parliament representing Ireland I am deeply disappointed with the wording of the resolution which has just been adopted by this House on the 2000 Nice European Council.
The reform of the European Union Treaties must take account of the needs and interests of smaller Member States.
Failure to do so would upset the delicate balance that is the very basis of the proper functioning of the Union.
I would like, in particular, to highlight a number of elements that I believe could hold inherent danger for the future stability of the Union as well as raising questions as to the democratic legitimacy of the decision-making process.
As far as the general extension of qualified majority voting is concerned, I do not believe that this is a helpful proposal as it would pre-empt the right of Member States to take a decision at the appropriate time on whether a policy should be communitised.
I firmly believe that any change from unanimity to QMV should be considered on a case-by-case basis.
Neither am I in favour of an automatic linking between QMV and codecision and once again believe that any decision to extend the powers of codecision should also be made on a case-by-case basis.
I am already on record as being absolutely opposed to bringing the common agricultural policy into the codecision sphere and will not further elaborate on that issue at this point.
In so far as the Charter of Fundamental Rights is concerned, while I am in favour of promoting the rights referred to in this document, I do not support its incorporation into the eventual Treaty of Nice.
An alternative solution such as EU accession to the European Convention on Human Rights merits much closer examination.
Whatever is finally agreed at Nice by the 15 Member State governments may well have to be ratified by the Irish people through a referendum.
I can assure you that the current negotiations are being followed in my country, as I am sure they are in all of your countries.
We must tread carefully and not run ahead of public opinion or of what our populations are ready for.
European integration for Ireland has been a very positive experience and I believe that one of the keys to this has been the gradual approach.
In order for Treaty reform, and indeed enlargement, to be a success it must have the full support of the people.
In this sense, no decision about the development of the EU should be taken which risks alienating the citizens of Europe.
After all, any democratic system is built upon the trust and confidence of the people.
If the Union loses public support then it loses its very legitimacy.
- (FR) The French Presidency announced the birth of a political Europe yet the Nice Summit will simply reinforce a Europe of defence and a commercial union.
The EU, within the framework of NATO, will take part in imposing a new world order which has little sympathy for the fate of the Palestinians and which is preparing to effectively endorse the liberalisation of rail transport and postal services.
The accession of new countries is a pretext for emphasising a European structure which is satisfactory only to industrial groups.
All the advocates of a liberal Europe are enlarging is the scale of misery of peoples already crushed by poverty and not only that but, on this occasion, they are imposing a political agenda which involves placing on an official footing a core of rich countries which will control an expanded European market.
By the same token, the EU is taking the initiative on the new liberal demands of the WTO and capitalist globalisation.
By amending Article 133 of the Treaty of Amsterdam, Europe would extend the qualified majority voting currently in force in the Council in trade matters to other areas such as public services, intellectual property, health and education.
Finally, the adoption of a Social Agenda is a decoy.
The Charter of Fundamental Rights will not even be a new, short-lived label, but instead one more liberal standard threatening to be raised over Europe.
For our part, we shall be participating in the alternative social summit together with all those who refuse to turn the world into a commodity.
. The votes of Conservative MEPs today reflect our view that Britain should be in a Europe that does less and does it better, not run by a Europe that does more, worse.
There were two types of EU reform on offer to MEPs today.
A Conservative response to the White Paper on Commission Reform would enable the EU to do less and to do it better.
The resolution on the Nice Summit is the blueprint for the EU to do more, worse.
The reforms proposed by Malcolm Harbour MEP on the White Paper are common sense reforms.
British people want reform of the EU to make it more accountable and more efficient.
Conservatives in the European Parliament have consistently argued for these reforms.
On the other hand, the so-called reforms proposed by the Nice Summit resolution make little sense to anyone in the world beyond Brussels.
They will make the EU more complicated and further removed from ordinary people.
They do nothing to help enlargement, such as overhauling the CAP.
This is the agenda Labour and the Lib Dems support.
. (PT) Parliament has just voted for a resolution on the Nice Summit in which:
1 - It does not deal clearly or in depth with any of the issues in which there were major divergences among the Member States in the work leading up to the IGC, leaving all the main Amsterdam left-overs without any prospects even now.
Thus Parliament waives its right to influence, shuts its mouth and remains silent for the sake of party, State and government loyalties, forgetting its obligations to the people.
2 - Despite everything, it ensures an advantage - not as tiny as it might seem - for the less populous States, which can always take advantage of Parliament' s silence at the choices of those States that seek to strengthen their institutional power in all the Community bodies.
From this standpoint, the large States are blocked by the rest and cannot drag Parliament into supporting their views, using it against us in the future architecture of the institutions.
3 - It demonstrates that the united efforts of the small countries' delegations have succeeded in drawing a political trump card from the others in next week' s debates in Nice.
Although we have not won, we have achieved a result in this resolution, which does not leave us defeated on the battlefield.
Sometimes silence is a victory...
4 - This explains why, as silence is not innocent, it can justify a vote in favour.
. (FR) I had no hesitation in voting against the joint resolution on the Nice European Council.
The voters I represent have no sympathy with any of its policy directions.
This text uses the future (and ever more distant) enlargement of the European Union as a pretext to call for the reinforcement of a system which has already run out of steam.
As if that were the only solution!
As if on our continent no other form of organisation were possible except the integrationist model, originally designed, need I remind you, for a hard core of five or six countries.
Why seek to find a solution to the squaring of the circle represented by the enlargement of the European Union and the representation of States and peoples in a system which is already saturated, when a different model, that of a Europe of Nations, would provide simple and effective solutions?
Why deny, furthermore, that the democratic alibi of this integrated Europe is nothing but a false nose?
An enlarged integrationist Europe is not by nature democratic: in fact it violates one of the most basic of human rights, the right to nationhood.
Need we remind ourselves that democracy does not boil down to having a vote?
Democracy presupposes dialogue, which in turn presupposes a shared feeling of community, which is often linked to language.
Our debates within this Chamber increasingly resemble a series of monologues than real exchanges.
Compare them to the vivacity, energy and pertinence of the debates in national parliaments: the members of parliament in the Palais Bourbon, Westminster, the Cortes are able to compare ideas because they are expressed within the same cultural framework and in the same language.
I also voted against a text which calls for the incorporation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights into the eventual Treaty of Nice.
This is an ambiguous and contradictory text, open to all sorts of interpretations.
It is impossible to claim, as some do, that this text is inoffensive.
In the hands of the European Court of Justice - 'one jurisdiction and one mission' as one of its judges said some years ago - the Charter may become the most undemocratic instrument to which European integration has given birth.
The Convention which was given the task of drawing it up foreshadows this: the sanctioning of the dominant role of influential groups and activist agencies in the construction of a federal Europe in the pipeline.
It is a body which, by its very nature, can find only a minimum consensus on the rights to which the people of Europe are already entitled. It is a body which has produced a text which will not fail to create a conflict of judicial doctrine between the Court of Justice and the Court of Human Rights.
. (FR) One last time before the Nice European Council, the European Parliament has had the opportunity to express its opinion on the major themes of the Intergovernmental Conference.
The Committee on Constitutional Affairs prepared a draft resolution outlining the expectations of the European Parliament.
While I may agree with the broad thrust of this resolution, "to make the European Union more democratic, more effective and closer to its citizens" , I am nevertheless unable to take on board a certain number of proposals which seem to me to be rather vague.
I therefore prefer to abstain.
On the crucial issue of the institutions, however, the proposal of a satisfactory all-round formula is to its credit.
The explicit affirmation of the principle of the double legitimacy of the European Union, that of the peoples and that of the Member States, is, in this respect, essential.
It will make it possible for negotiators from the least populous Member States to defend, in Nice, the principle of adequate representation in all the institutions, including the European Parliament.
It is becoming ever more apparent that opening the debate on proportionality (votes in the Council and seats in the European Parliament), one might go so far as to say on the balance of power between the Member States, has opened a Pandora' s box which will be very difficult to close in Nice.
Now, there are squabbles not only between the 'larger' and the 'smaller' but among the 'larger' too.
It would be a good idea for the European Council to decide, from the outset, to base all its institutional decisions on the principle of double legitimacy, which has proved itself from the very inception of the Community.
. (SV) I welcome the aim to ease the enlargement process at the Conference of the European Council in Nice.
However, the common resolution contains a number of formulations that I cannot support.
I am against the development of a common defence policy and the establishment of a council of defence ministers.
I cannot support qualified majority voting within trade policy, nor do I support the decision on qualified majority voting under the second pillar, that is to say within foreign, security and defence policy.
It is a mistake to divide the union up into an A-team and a B-team, and I therefore cannot support a third of the Member States being given precedence.
Similarly, it is a mistake to incorporate the Charter into the Treaty.
Brok report (A5-0340/2000)
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, we deplored the Brok report and the report by Mrs Lalumière, not only because of what they contain but also because of their subject matter, the common foreign and security policy. We have always believed it was unrealistic, and it has proved to be so in the eight years since it was adopted by the Maastricht Treaty.
Ironically, and just for the record, I should mention Article J2, the third paragraph of Title 5 of the Maastricht Treaty, which states: "Member States shall ensure that their national policies conform on the common positions" .
This article has not been respected once; nor indeed have the other articles in Title 5.
On the contrary, it has been consistently flouted, the last example to date being London' s recognition of North Korea.
The President-in-Office of the European Union deplored this breach, which, and I quote him, he described as "exceptional" , and then, three days later Berlin followed suit without even taking the trouble, it seems, to inform the French Presidency.
We are a laughing stock and, basically, that is just one more disappointment for the poor old construction of Europe or, rather, the deconstruction of Europe.
I am thinking, for example, of the reform of our institutions, which was promised for 1995, then 1997, and which still seems to be in the doldrums just a few days away from the Nice Summit.
This will be just one more disappointment to add to our vagaries on enlargement, which itself has been promised for ten years, to say nothing of the successive and, I might add, cumulative collapses of the euro.
But these are just examples.
I could go on and talk about the reduction in appropriations for the MEDA programme or the European Development Fund.
There is just one thing to be retained from these reports and, if only for that, we would have to oppose it. That is the almost ritual reference to NATO since, basically, the only thing that Mr Brok has managed to put in the 1999 annual report is the Kosovo affair.
It has to be said that, this time, the Europeans have found an arbiter in Washington and that, thanks to the rearguard of American generals, Europe has finally found a certain unity.
This is laughable, I repeat, and when historians write the history of Europe in the twentieth century, I think they will mention neither the common foreign and security policy nor the League of Nations, and perhaps that is just as well.
Madam President, with regard to the Brok report, which I have willingly voted in favour of, I should like to mention the observations that an old pensioner - he is called Maurizio Enfissi, from the town of Capriate San Gervasio in the province of Bergamo - made to me when I told him that Europe was beginning to think about its own security and its own defence.
'Good for you!' he said.
'I fought in the last war and I did not like it at all.
So if you succeed in avoiding wars, as you have done so far, you will be doing the most important thing that has ever been done in the world.'
And then he added, 'When I was in the war, I missed several years of work towards my pension.
And the war pension I am paid is so, so little...
But are these wars really necessary?!' .
. (SV) We welcome and support the report, which touches on many important trends in the development of the common foreign and security policy.
However, we cannot support the tasks performed by the High Representative being transferred to the Commission.
Nor can we support the conversion of the Community' s delegations into EU embassies.
The Member States have responsibility for foreign diplomacy.
We feel that the conversion of the Commission' s delegations into Community delegations risks leading to conflicts of interest with the national diplomatic delegations of the Member States.
- (NL) Earlier this year I heard Mr Solana saying enthusiastically that there are many areas outside the territory of the European Union where action can be taken.
His new role has put an end to the traditional neutrality of Ireland, Sweden, Finland and Austria.
After 1945, defence was taken to mean the defence of one' s own territory against foreign attackers.
So a country' s defensive army did not have any tasks beyond the territory of the state that had established it.
NATO abided by this formula during the first 50 years of its existence.
The United States army moved into Vietnam, the Dominican Republic and Grenada, whilst France and England tried to gain control of the Suez Canal, but countries did not take action as part of NATO outside their own territory.
That did not happen until the Soviet Union and the Warsaw Pact - which for years had justified the existence of NATO - had collapsed.
My party, the Socialist Party of the Netherlands, rejects any attempt on the part of the European Union to imitate the superpower America.
I cannot go along with the aims Mr Brok hopes to achieve via his report.
. (FR) The 'Other Europe' delegation of the Union for a Europe of Nations Group resolutely voted against the own-initiative report which was drawn up by the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy and presented by Mr Brok.
As every year, this ritual report prepared by the European Parliament, which is in principle devoted to the annual general budget of the CFSP, employs the well-known method of gradual shifts which work on a federalist crevice found in a given area in order to extend this breach with scant regard for the Treaties or the decisions of the European Councils.
In this case, it is the area of the Helsinki Council and common foreign policy, a field in which the rapporteur sets himself three main objectives. We have no alternative but to reject these objectives, which are as follows: to reduce European action in the world to that of the European Union as sole actor; to establish a European Ministry of Foreign Affairs intended to absorb the functions of national ministries and, finally, to get rid of the structure of the European Union in terms of pillars by widening the Community method, in particular by placing the High Representative under the responsibility of the Commission.
This action plan, which deals with the structures, leaves out just one albeit decisive element, the definition and content, at an earlier stage, of a European foreign policy.
The truth is that, far removed from the virtual visions which hold sway within this Parliament, diplomatic realities are entirely different and the CFSP hardly exists.
Glaring proof of this has just been adduced, as if this were necessary, by the recognition of the Republic of North Korea by the United Kingdom and Germany, without waiting for a common position to be adopted.
Hence, it is clear that the way to strengthen the weight of European diplomatic action is to seek the harmonisation - where desirable, opportune and effective - of decisions which remain fundamentally the prerogative of the national actor, not through structural constraints which are totally ineffectual.
That is why our group once again voted against the absurd proposals to communitise national diplomatic services included in Articles 74 and 75 of the resolution, to turn European Union delegations into actual European embassies, and to establish a European diplomatic academy.
The mind boggles at the proposal to put the entire diplomatic staff of Europe of an estimated 40 000 perfectly real people at the service of a virtual foreign policy. This proposal is both specific and surreal!
. There is much that the British Conservative group can support in this report, in particular the emphasis on enlargement of the Union.
However there are a number of specific elements which we cannot support, for example:
that the Commission should assume the responsibility for security policy and defence by taking over the role of the High Representative for CFSP (Paragraphs 65,66,68)
that Commission delegations should take on the role of "EU embassies" and coordinate the work of Member State embassies (Paragraph 74)
the support for an autonomous security and defence policy outside of NATO (Paragraphs 11-15)
the suggestion of EU military adventures in Asia (Paragraph 38)
Lalumière report (A5-0339/2000)
Madam President, I was in Rome last week.
I have a nephew, my sister' s son, who has been at the NATO bases in the United States learning to fly fighter planes, and he has been promoted, so he is ready to be an air-force pilot.
While chatting to me he learnt that a military force of the States of Europe is being organised, a force ready to intervene to keep the peace in and around Europe.
'Oh, I' d like to be part of that!' he told me.
But it is not because of that that I mention him, of course - if he is good, he will go far - but because we then carried on talking and he added, 'But this idea of a European army and a European police force is quite right!
Why do we need standing armies to defend the borders between Italy, France, Germany and Spain, which do not exist any more?
Joining forces is a positive step.' .
- (DA) The Liberals' five Members of the European Parliament have today voted in favour of Mrs Lalumière' s report on the common security and defence policy, because we are in favour of strengthening the EU countries' power to act and, therefore, NATO too.
The criterion of success for this new form of cooperation must be that both the EU and NATO are strengthened by it.
- (DA) The Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament have supported the report on setting up a common European security and defence policy.
There are nonetheless a number of features of the report about which we have reservations.
First of all, it is important to state that, because of its reservation in the military sphere, Denmark cannot contribute forces to the common European rapid reaction force.
Secondly, we are sceptical about the ideas for establishing a proper European space policy, if the intention behind this is for Europe to have a defence system such as that which the United States is in the process of establishing.
From a research point of view and in relation to the monitoring of the environment, a common European space programme may nonetheless have some advantages.
Thirdly, there are a number of points in the report which leave one wishing that the European Parliament had more influence in devising a common European security and defence policy.
We think it is very important to state that formulating security and defence policy is an intergovernmental concern in which the European Parliament neither can nor should be involved.
Further institutionalisation of security and defence policy in the EU is therefore a development that we cannot support.
It is up to each individual Member State to decide to what extent it wants to participate in a common European security and defence policy.
Nor, furthermore, is it a task for the European Parliament to define what capacity a European rapid reaction force should possess and whether or not it should, for example, include a capacity for intervention by air and sea.
Parliament' s desire for all Member States to contribute financially to the European rapid reaction force, even if they are not involved in operations, is in our view inappropriate since it could mean, for example, that some countries are involved in a conflict they do not wish to take part in.
In connection with this, it is also important to emphasise that those Member States that are neutral must not in any way be compromised.
Their desire to remain neutral must be respected in every way.
. (FR) We have naturally voted against this report.
Under cover of establishing and developing a so-called European security and defence policy, it glaringly exposes the need for a military policy in the service of what it calls 'the foreign policy objectives of the European Union' , in other words, the interests of the imperialist powers and major capitalist groups which dominate Europe and which dictate European Union policy.
We protest against this imperialist military policy all the more given that a declared consensus on the issue holds sway in this Chamber, with acceptance of and open support for this policy on the part of the vast majority of groups, from the extreme right to the Greens and the Socialists.
The truth is that this policy is directed against ordinary people, like all those who, as we saw recently in the Balkans, have to endure the imperialist military interventions by the European Union and its allies.
It is also, however, directed against the people of the European Union who will, in any event, have to finance the new expenditure on armaments which the report advocates and who will not even have a guarantee that these military forces will not one day be turned against themselves for the sake of 'maintaining law and order' .
. (IT) Europe must become a political Union too, and not just an economic one.
For this reason the Italian Communists offer and propose very fast enlargement to the candidate countries in order to build a great Europe based on its cultures and its best democratic traditions.
In this context, once all opposition between the countries of Western Europe and the countries of Central and Eastern Europe has been left behind, the military organisation of NATO will also be left behind - in fact it will then be completely anachronistic - in favour of a European military force wholly independent of the United States, with which Europe must maintain close, friendly, but no longer subordinate relations.
The European military force should be totally European, democratically controlled by parliamentary resolutions, effective and efficient.
If such a military force had existed, through the history and traditions of the peoples that compose it, NATO' s war against Yugoslavia would not have happened.
That is why we voted for the Lalumière report, but with many reservations and objections concerning the aggressive tone found in some parts of the resolution which, in any case, we shall fight to avoid.
. (SV) We have voted against the report by Mrs Lalumière for reasons that include the following:
1.
We do not consider that there is any real threat to Europe at present; rather, it is now high time for an active disarmament policy and civil development.
We are convinced that a Europe of Peace will not be created through military alliances.
Future conflicts will not be solved through military intervention but rather via a policy for social, economic and ecological justice.
Our peace policy analysis is based on the conflict theory that militarisation does not create a more secure and more peaceful world, but rather contributes to growing uncertainty and increased risk of military conflict.
2.
We feel that civil crisis management is a valuable instrument for preventing conflicts, something which we must unfortunately state has not been given sufficient attention in the report.
3.
We feel that military initiatives within the common security and defence policy must only be implemented following and in accordance with resolutions by the UN Security Council, a view that the rapporteur does not seem to share.
4.
The report is based on an intervention philosophy that we do not share.
We consider that international law and the sovereignty of the national States must be respected and must be the guiding principle of international policy.
There is talk of the EU' s common interests and values as grounds for military armament.
We do not consider that there is reason for militarisation on the basis of these values, which are not defined, and we would question what they mean.
5.
Mrs Lalumière clearly points out that it is probable that in the future within the EU we will be forced to defend all the boundaries of EU Member States from third countries.
This is not compatible with the freedom from alliances of certain Member States.
6.
Furthermore, freedom from alliances is not taken up at all in the report and in the explanatory statement section of the report we sense a lack of respect towards States that are neutral.
In Paragraph 49, Member States who do not wish to or cannot participate in a task are nonetheless obliged to make a contribution to the financing of the task.
This is not compatible with freedom from alliances.
7.
We consider the idea of a large-scale defence force to be an insult to the candidate countries that already have stretched economies and that need to invest money in, say, social welfare rather than military armament.
.
(PT) This is a particularly serious report and in adopting it Parliament gives its support to a greater militarisation of the European Union, with a view to establishing a 50 - 60 000 strong Rapid Reaction Force by 2003 to be mobilised within 60 days and deployable for a year with the necessary air and maritime support.
It emphasises the development of the European Union' s military assets and capabilities and the Member States' effort to close the gaps that currently exist in this field, as they have just done in the fields of strategic air transport, cruise missiles and reconnaissance and navigation satellites.
Equally serious is the intention that any State that does not wish to take part in a mission should be required to pay a financial contribution to be divided up among the States participating in that war.
Another point deserving our disapproval is the satisfaction with the framework agreement signed in Farnborough by six countries of the European Union, since this will facilitate the restructuring of the defence industries in Europe and emphasise a space policy covering the civilian and military aspects of the use of space and combining the European Union national and multinational resources the holds in the military field.
Lastly, it should be noted that in Nice, as the report states, the definitive CESDP bodies - Military Committee and Military Staff - may be set up with responsibilities and decision-making powers enabling swifter progress to be made towards the implementation of the common security and defence policy.
We can therefore only vote against this report.
. FR) In deciding to create the nucleus of a European army, the Nice Summit will reaffirm the creation of Europe as a major power which will 'defend its interests throughout the world' .
In this way, Europe is exposing its imperialist character, with the protection of its investments abroad, the penetration of its goods, access to raw materials and the exploitation of cheap labour.
It will act in concert with the United States within NATO.
But this European army will primarily serve to stabilise the immediate periphery of the European Union.
The commercial annexation of the East and of North Africa can but exacerbate social inequalities, which in turn will lead to social explosions, local armed conflicts and massive displacements of populations.
In the future, by coordinating its diplomatic and military forces, the European Union will try to optimise what its Member States did individually all through the last century, and all in the name of 'maintaining' peace and 'humanitarian operations' .
We do not need euro-militarism.
We are radically opposed to this European army as we are to NATO and to our own national army.
The creation of a European military industry (EADS, Dassault, BAE) capable of checkmating the United States would in the first instance result in a dramatic increase in the military budget and a transfer of scientific and technological research to the military sector.
Workers have nothing to gain and everything to lose from this 'new' imperial design of the European Union.
- (NL) In my explanation of vote for the Brok report, I stated that I do not regard action taken by EU Member State armed forces outside their own territory as a contribution to defence or security.
The 50-year anniversary of NATO was marked by the first NATO war.
This war enabled Milosevic to continue ruling Serbia and Montenegro a year longer because it gave him the opportunity to set himself up as the Serbs' best guarantee against foreign aggression.
The rapporteur now cites a number of reasons for taking action outside one' s own territory, one being justifiable outrage at ethnic conflicts outside the Union.
It is positive that we are dealing with this by using mediation techniques, producing models for administrative solutions and delivering humanitarian aid to those who have felt constrained to move as a result of this conflict.
It is no good trying to impose a solution from outside using military methods, because it does not tackle the root cause of the conflict or change public opinion.
The fear that energy supplies will not be made available for the Member States could never be a valid reason for unilateral intervention.
. (SV) I have voted against the report.
From among several points of which I am critical in the report I wish to mention the following examples:
Paragraph 49: "Calls at all events for any Member State not wishing to take part in a task to be required, by reason of the mutual solidarity linking the Member States, to make a financial contribution to be divided between the participating States" .
Paragraph 50: "Considers that Petersberg tasks should in the long term be funded from the general budget of the European Communities, which would require a revision of Article 28 of the TEU and of the Financial Perspective" .
I consider that these two points are so far-reaching that it is difficult to maintain the right of alliance-free States such as Sweden to independent decision making within defence policy and the right to non-involvement in armed conflict.
The wording in the report is thus too far-reaching and consequently reason enough to vote against the report as a whole.
. (SV) I value the attempt to develop a common European security policy, but I am against the development of a common military defence force.
For example, the wording is far too far-reaching in respect of CESDP and NATO, in respect of the use of "threats of the use of force" as a means of applying pressure in conflict prevention activities, which directly contravenes the UN Charter.
The same applies to the wording concerning improving the EU' s capacity to penetrate enemy air defences and naval intervention, as well as the wording concerning closer cooperation in respect of collective defence guarantees.
I therefore cannot support the report.
- (SV) I support the holistic orientation of the report, but would like to stress that my opinion differs as regards Paragraph 49.
Here it is requested that States that do not wish to participate in a task shall be ordered to make a financial contribution to be divided between the participating States by reason of the mutual solidarity linking the Member States.
In my opinion such a requirement is too far-reaching.
Brok report (A5-0340/2000) and Lalumière report (A5-0339/2000)
- (DA) We have voted against the Brok and Lalumière reports for a number of reasons.
We do not consider that an arms build-up, with the resultant increased military expenditure, is the answer to the challenges faced by Europe in 2001 and beyond.
Now, in the decade following the upheavals in the East, we think that, with these reports, 'the European peace project' is sending an unhelpful signal to the applicant States.
Secondly, the reports set the stage for a split with the non-aligned countries which, it is proposed, would be involved through their financing of the common European security and defence policy.
The talk about being 'united in diversity' rings hollow, especially for the non-aligned Member States, if only parts of the content of the reports are put into practice.
The introduction of a new form of territorial defence, which would come under the aegis of a Vice-President of the Commission it has also been proposed, is a point that we cannot support either.
A break of that kind with NATO, only to see a new partitioning of Europe, is far from the enigmatic words spoken following the fall of the Berlin Wall.
What we definitely do not need is the development of further military structures.
However, it would be to the EU' s credit if the priorities of the Petersberg tasks were turned around and the focus placed upon model solutions of a civil and humanitarian nature.
Theorin report (A5-0308/2000)
I voted in favour of this measure, Madam President, because it is only right that any attempt to bring peace to regions where internecine strife and civil conflicts rage should be supported by the Pensioners' Party.
I must, however, make one point to Mrs Theorin: among the numerous proposals she presented for women to be able to influence peace in war zones, she forgot to propose that the top echelons of armies should also be filled with women.
Madam President, if you are clever and capable enough to direct this quarrelsome European Parliament, you would surely also be able to direct the military forces deployed to bring peace to war zones: you could thus make your contribution in support of women' s beneficial influence on peace.
- (DE) It is an acceptable idea, in principle, that the Committee on Women's Rights and Equal Opportunities should produce an own-initiative report concerning the participation of women in the peaceful resolution of conflicts.
But the end product is actually tantamount to fraudulent misrepresentation, because very little of what has been set down in the nine and a half pages of this motion for a resolution actually relates to the subject of the report.
We have 18 references to documents, declarations, conventions, resolutions of the UN General Assembly and Security Council and action plans which are hundreds of pages long, the scope of which is beyond the grasp of most of us.
We have 19 recitals and 23 numbered paragraphs with 36 subparagraphs.
A mere six of these paragraphs contain statements relating to the title of the report.
The rest is packed with remarks about rape, the sexual misdemeanours of European soldiers on peacekeeping missions - the Serb troops are not mentioned - the positioning and lighting of latrines in refugee camps, demands relating to asylum and immigration policy, abortion, adoption, statistical analyses differentiated by sex, the creation of ministries for women's affairs in the Member States and much more besides.
A teacher marking such a piece of work would write "Does not answer the question".
I cannot support this kind of hotchpotch, which simply hijacks the subject to use it as a vehicle for ramming ideological demands on the aforementioned topics down our throats.
Let me pre-empt any misinterpretation of my vote as an expression of opposition to women's participation in the peaceful resolution of conflicts.
I am not opposed to it - on the contrary!
.
I support this report from my colleague Maj-Britt Theorin.
As she points out, sexual violence and mass rapes of women are used systematically during conflicts as weapons of war.
I back her calls to the Member States to take all necessary steps to amend Article 75 of the Fourth Geneva Protocol to define rape, forced impregnation and sexual slavery as war crimes;
I also support her call for the ratification of the Treaty of Rome on the International Criminal Court.
The rapporteur also deserves support for her calls on the Commission and the Member States to take account of gender differences in the organisation of EU-funded refugee camps and in their asylum and immigration policy, by for example, granting asylum to women who have been raped during an armed conflict.
(SV) We would like to express our support for the report in broad terms, but have difficulty accepting the detailed rules that the report contains in certain cases - which is reflected in our voting - since this conflicts with the principle of subsidiarity.
Moreover, the report goes further than its original task, as defined in the title of the report.
Many of the problems that are taken up in the report are very real, but do not belong in this document.
.
The report "Gender-related aspects of the prevention and resolution of armed conflicts" aims to report on participation of women in peaceful conflict resolution.
Actually, there is confusion in this report as its title does not fully represent its content.
Some provisions - like punishing rapists, making camps physically safe for women, and making sure women in stressful situations get fair portions of food and medical resources- are good.
But the language of the document goes even further.
Sadly, there is clearly an aim at overriding national abortion laws or even punishing or suppressing faith traditions opposing abortion.
This contravenes the constitution of my country of Ireland, and I have no doubt the legislative position of other countries which seek to diminish rather than promote the practice of abortion.
Whilst I fully recognise and support the participation of women in peaceful conflict resolution, I must sadly vote against this rather confused report.
Smet report (A5-0301/2000)
. (FR) The only positive aspects of this report are that it calls for a 'European definition of domestic work' and a 'clear limitation of the maximum number of hours to be worked' .
However, dealing ostensibly with domestic workers, the report, in fact, chiefly deals with the interests of those who employ them, which would not be shocking if it concerned only the category of employers, in a minority what is more, that are 'elderly people living alone and needing domestic help' .
But the needs of this category of employers are only brought up in order to call for the introduction of measures to make 'domestic services tax-deductible' and to adjust 'prices and costs to take account of individuals' financial resources' .
If Parliament votes in favour of this clause, it will above all enable rich families to subsidise their expenditure on domestic services by money squeezed out of the community.
I would like to add an extra touch of cynicism: the explanatory statement makes domestic workers responsible for the fact that their employers employ them illegally.
As a result, although we are not voting against this report on account of the few basic rights which it does express, we will not be voting in favour of it either.
. (SV) We are voting against this report that deals with so-called domestic help.
The introduction of models of this type, sometimes referred to as the "new labour market" , in countries such as Belgium and Denmark clearly shows a preservation of a lower servant class consisting primarily of immigrant women, but also of men and the long-term unemployed.
To tax-subsidise such a labour market is in our opinion downright offensive.
Tax resources should be used in another way, for example so that people can improve themselves and be given choices in life.
Problems taken up in the report can be solved with a humane asylum and refugee policy, by organising work to take into consideration a balance between work and personal life as well as by taking responsibility for people with special needs in a way which shows solidarity and social responsibility.
Many tens of thousands of women in the European Union who provide domestic help in the informal sector of the economy would no doubt be delighted that we are dealing with the regulation of such activity, if only they knew.
This report certainly has the advantage that it exists.
However, I am not very comfortable with some of the wording in it.
In my own country of Luxembourg, we are in the normal situation of making no distinction between manual workers, whether they work in industry, in households or anywhere else.
They are entitled to a statutory minimum wage and to membership of the health, accident and pensions insurance schemes.
In short, there is no discrimination against them in relation to other employees.
That, of course, almost sounds like a perfect world when I read all the proposals for possible exceptional arrangements that are listed in this report.
I see no reason, for example, why the working conditions of domestic staff should be in any way untypical.
It is actually incredible that, in the twenty-first century, we should still be recommending that Member States guarantee the right of domestic staff to social security cover and adequate pensions.
I am equally astonished by the demand that prices and costs in respect of domestic work be adjusted at national level to take account of individuals' financial resources.
The call for simplification of administrative formalities for employers, on the other hand, makes good sense.
In Luxembourg, we decided to carry out this type of simplification within the framework of the national employment plan.
It works very well and is a model which I, in all modesty, would recommend.
The demand that domestic services be made tax-deductible to reduce the difference in cost between employing undeclared and declared workers is also a step in the right direction.
National governments should be magnanimous here, so as to ensure that employees and employers have an incentive to stop offering and engaging in illicit work.
May I also warn against granting migrant women work permits for domestic work.
The gangs who smuggle people into our countries would be delighted and would naturally ensure that all the women they intended to bring into EU countries illegally were declared as domestic staff.
Is this what we want?
I think not.
We should therefore be wary of making such statements which could leave us open to abuse.
. (SV) We have voted against Smet' s report on the regulation of domestic help.
The rapporteur feels that a legal framework is required at European level that makes it possible for persons providing domestic services to be covered by employment protection legislation.
Smet proposes, amongst other things, that a European definition of domestic work be introduced.
In addition, the rapporteur requires the Member States to introduce tax allowances for domestic services so that the differences between the costs of "black" and "white" labour are reduced.
There is great demand for domestic help.
However, the high taxation rate both in Sweden and in other EU countries prevents supply and demand from intersecting in the non-shadow economy.
Income taxes, social security contributions and VAT drive up the hourly rate to levels that almost no household with a normal income is prepared to pay.
More or less all domestic work that is carried out against payment is currently carried out in the black economy.
Many women and young people work in this market.
They have no rights, no insurance, no pension credits, no sick pay and no security.
Too many young people are at risk of their first contact with the labour market being a job in the black economy.
It is highly unfortunate that unreasonable tax rules are forcing people into the black economy in this way.
We therefore agree with the rapporteur that it is important for the differences between the costs of 'black' and 'white' labour to be reduced and feel that the Member States should introduce a tax reduction on domestic services.
This will allow the people who carry out domestic services to be covered by insurance, pension schemes, sick pay and security.
However, we are against the introduction of a legal framework containing detailed rules at European level for domestic help.
These matters should be dealt with at national, regional or local level, and consequently we are voting against the report.
Mrs Smet is right to draw attention to the vulnerable position of domestic helpers in the black economy.
She is calling for a European definition of "domestic work" to be drafted and for Member States to draw up and regularly update statistics on undeclared work.
She wants this type of work to be recognised as an occupation in its own right and is calling for European rules to be established on the rights of these workers - at present the situation varies from country to country.
The needs of domestic workers should be considered when employment legislation is being drafted.
The need for all Member States to introduce the principle of declaring all employment relationships is stressed and both employers and employees should be made aware of their rights under their employment relationship.
Finally, she wants Member States to link the issuing of visas for domestic employees working for diplomats to be linked to a guaranteed minimum level of working conditions.
This report merits careful consideration.
- (NL) Female labour has a long history of poor pay, poor working conditions, a poor legal position and sexual intimidation.
This especially applies to work performed by poor women in the households of the rich.
That kind of work is usually organised on an informal basis, with no trade union representation, works council, premium payment or collective labour agreement.
The employee has little or no protection and in many cases is largely dependent on the discretion of the employer.
The very worst situation is when the women concerned also come from distant countries, having taken the work on out of desperation because they have no other way of continuing to provide for themselves.
It is an occupational group that is often forgotten in a world still heavily dominated by men.
Everyone is aware that the situation is open to abuse, but many people are inclined to seriously underestimate the scale of this abuse and the impact on those concerned.
This own-initiative report is a useful product of the Commission' s fight for women' s rights and equal opportunities.
The talks held with interested organisations and the itemisation of the problems that exist remind me of investigative reports on the position of workers over a century ago.
Although my group considers the report to be too limited and the conclusions too modest, they will help us to start moving in the right direction.
(SV) We take a positive attitude to domestic services being incorporated into the labour market, but have difficulty in accepting the detailed rules at EU level that the report contains in certain cases and that conflict with the principle of subsidiarity.
Moreover, in certain cases the report goes beyond its original mandate as defined in the title of the report.
Guy-Quint report (A5-0327/2000)
Madam President, I shall not waste your time explaining why I voted for the Guy-Quint report, but I really must say that for the elderly and pensioners it is very important to know how European Union funds are spent, how in concrete terms they are used by the administrative offices of the Commission.
This is because pensioners have had first-hand experience throughout Europe of what bad administration means.
They have given their pension contributions to the various national governments, which have quickly made them vanish like clever magicians.
I should not want President Prodi too, like a clever magician, like a modern European Houdini, to succeed in making the funds at the disposal of all European citizens vanish.
It is just a fear: I am sure he will not do so, but I should like to emphasise this anyway on behalf of pensioners.
. (FR) In March 1999, in the wake of various scandals and patent inefficiencies, the European Commission resigned.
This resignation, the outcome of a long process of deterioration, must not however make us forget that the 'Delors Commission' bore heavier responsibilities than its successor.
This resignation, imposed by the elected representatives of the nations of Europe, revealed the pressing need for far-reaching reform of working methods within the various Directorates-General of the Commission, and of decision-making procedures and structures, in order to improve the utilisation of the available resources in the management of Community resources and policies.
The Union for a Europe of Nations Group, while taking note of the serious infringements of the past, will not criticise the Commission and its reform out of hand.
It is clear, however, that the exercise it is engaged in must seek primarily to restore the widely and legitimately shattered confidence of public opinion in the European institutions. This must come about, as the report says 'by means of a significant improvement in performance and efficiency' , but also by means of more transparent practices.
The Commission reform will be judged on actual evidence, hence the need for regular follow-up reports, which the European Commission will present throughout the programme, and the importance of the overall report, which is expected in December 2002.
As far as the ABB is concerned, on the basis of whose activities the budget is established, we recall that it presupposes an amendment of Article 19 of the Financial Regulation, which establishes the distinction between Part A (administrative appropriations) and Part B (operating appropriations). As a result, the Commission must ensure that it does not call into question Parliament' s powers with respect to the allocation of resources.
The French delegation will naturally oppose the introduction of the codecision procedure in amending the Financial Regulation.
By imposing the dismantling of the Technical Assistance Offices with a view to increasing the Commission' s accountability for programme implementation, this House wishes to point out that 'only tasks not requiring public authority intervention might be outsourced to the private sector, and this in the form of one-off contracts' .
As regards commitology, the Union for a Europe of Nations Group denounces the report' s federalist vision, which claims that Member States, through management and regulatory committees, encroach on the Commission' s independence as regards management, and reproaches Member States 'through those committees, of promoting national interests which are sometimes at odds with those of the Community' .
The rapporteur even takes the view that 'reforming the Commission must provide an opportunity to restrict their intervention solely to areas where no expenditure is involved' .
The management of Community policies must reflect the pragmatic agreements entered into between the countries of the European Union.
For our part, we take the view that, especially because of the widespread lack of bureaucratic transparency which prevails and the scandals and inefficiencies of a still recent past, Member States must be more than ever involved in the decision-making process.
The willingness shown by the rapporteur to eliminate their influence is, in this respect, edifying!
The Commission proposals, in the context of its reform, raise a number of questions as regards human resources.
I will cite but one: the early retirement measure concerning some 600 staff, which is 3% of the total staff employed.
The Commission services tell us that this would not have any significant impact on the budget.
Our group hopes this is the case, but this is not a sufficient condition and it is necessary to ensure, in particular, that the statutory provisions are respected and that these measures do not obscure the other priorities of the reform and do not give rise to a political settling of scores.
It is, moreover, common knowledge that certain nationalities are manifestly over-represented in the junior grades of categories C and D, for the undisclosed budgetary reason that the staff concerned would not benefit from the 16% expatriation allowance!
These discriminatory practices are unacceptable.
The fact is that unemployment exists in all our countries and the Commission would be well advised to take advantage of future procedures for early retirement and for the recruitment of hundreds of new civil servants to start putting its house in order.
By the same token, nepotism and lack of transparency must be eradicated from the Commission services, especially as regards recruitment for temporary posts.
Finally, the Union for a Europe of Nations Group forcefully recalls that the citizens of the European Union expect more than ever that reform measures and staff recruitment must take account of the diversity of opinions and convictions which are expressed in our countries.
Pomés Ruiz report (A5-0329/2000)
Madam President, I voted in favour of the Pomés Ruiz report.
It is most important that it should be possible to check the budgets and expenditure relating to the Commission' s activities.
But most of all I voted in favour because what I would like - and I want to say this in this Parliament - is that when the accounts are checked, that is, how the money has been spent by the Commission, attention should be paid not only to checking the figures - 4 plus 4 is 8, 8 plus 8 is 16, 16 plus 16 is 32, 32 plus 32 is 64 - but also to checking whether these expenses have really been useful to Europe, whether they have really achieved the aims that they were meant to achieve.
This is a check to be done alongside the mathematical check on the figures.
. (FR) In the still recent past, various scandals and inefficiencies resulted in the resignation of the European Commission in March 1999.
This resignation revealed the need for an in-depth reform of the structures, procedures and working methods within the Commission services in order to ensure optimum use of resources in the management of Community policies.
The proposals contained in the White Paper, which are to a large extent drawn from the second report of the Committee of Independent Experts, should make it possible for the Commission to equip itself with the optimum organisational structure and operating methods so as to fulfil to the best of its ability the tasks assigned to it by the Treaties, without, however, encouraging it to exceed the limits of its prerogatives as defined in the Treaty, which has all too often been the case in the past.
Nor is there any doubt, by virtue of the powers and competences conferred upon it by the Treaty, that Parliament is required to fully exercise its powers of scrutiny with regard to the Commission, particularly as regards transparency and the implementation of the Community budget.
The fact is that the citizens of our 15 nations, who elect their representatives, would not understand if this were not the case, because it is their money which is at stake.
Quite clearly, the effectiveness of the reform proposed in the White Paper will be judged by its results in terms of the use made of financial and human resources, particularly by the application of the relevant financial provisions being effectively monitored with appropriate supervisory and sanction mechanisms.
As regards standards of behaviour in public life, the Union for a Europe of Nations Group welcomes the establishment of a set of codes of conduct for the Commission (code of conduct for Commissioners, code of conduct governing relations between Commissioners and departments and code of good administrative behaviour for relations with the public) and reiterates its view that these texts should have a legal basis.
Delays in the payment of sums due by the Commission often appear unjustified.
It is important therefore that this situation is remedied as quickly a possible by speeding up payment of the sums due, lest the smooth running of all the European institutions be damaged.
The fact is that Community policies are reflected in moral and financial commitments to our citizens and third-country nationals.
It is therefore necessary to ensure that these commitments are respected much more closely than they have been in the past.
As far as human resources are concerned, the quality of employees and greater transparency in staffing policy in general must become the strong points of the new administrative reform.
The Union for a Europe of Nations Group welcomes in principle the response represented by the Commission White Paper to the appeal made by the European Parliament inviting it to carry out far-reaching reform of its human resources policy.
The Union for a Europe of Nations Group, however, forcefully recalls that, as regards staff recruitment, the Commission reform must take account of the diversity of opinions and beliefs which are expressed in our countries regarding Europe, its past and its future.
The citizens of our respective countries would not understand if this were not the case.
By the same token, lack of transparency and nepotism must be eradicated from recruitment, especially as regards recruitment for temporary posts.
The Union for a Europe of Nations Group does not at this stage wish to express any opposition to the early retirement of hundreds of officers from the Commission services provided, however, that the statutory provisions are respected, that the early retirement measures do not hinder the priorities of the reform, that these retirements have a neutral impact on the budget, that they are implemented in the interest of the service and under volunteer termination of service and do not give rise to a political settling of scores.
In conclusion, I feel bound to say that we expect this reform, which is essential for the future, to introduce greater discipline and greater transparency into the day-to-day running of the Commission, but it must also lead to a greater sense of accountability on its part, within the strict framework of the competences that have been devolved to it.
Harbour report (A5-0326/2000)
Madam President, this report by Mr Harbour concerns itself most of all with the Commission' s staff: salaries, career structure and also pensions.
Now, the Commission should demonstrate in practice that it knows how to administer its staff' s pension funds properly.
As it says on page 16 of the Harbour report, there should be a move to a funded pension scheme.
We have the example of the European Parliament' s pension fund, so outstandingly managed by our administrators, who have made wise use of the MEPs' pension funds, that they have recently increased payments to retired members.
The same should be done for the Commission' s staff and eventually for all citizens in the European Union.
Lamassoure report (A5-0328/2000)
I have voted in favour of the Lamassoure report, which concerns itself most of all with the institutional aspects of Commission reform.
During this explanation of vote, I must emphasise the fact that Parliament does not, unfortunately, have all the powers it should have.
A change I have never heard proposed - yet one which I consider useful, important and not difficult to implement - is that the initiative in lawmaking should be reserved for Parliament and not shared with the Commission.
The Commission should execute: it should be the executive power of the European Union;
Parliament should be the legislative power.
There should be a separation of powers - as was said at the time of the French Revolution - in the European Union too.
.
British Conservative Members will vote against the report because of the well-rehearsed opposition to the extension of QMV and proposed incorporation of the blanket of fundamental rights into the Treaty.
Concerning enhanced cooperation, they support the initiative as it is compatible with the view that greater flexibility be introduced into the operation of the EU.
Conservatives also support the statement in Paragraph 7 of the report that democratic control be ensured and that the three pillar system be enabled to work.
The notion that Parliament' s assent be required to authorise the procedure would only be necessary if the existing unanimity rule in the Council were to be waived.
Sauquillo Pérez del Arco report (A5-0337/2000)
Madam President, we abstained from this vote.
I would still like to give some kind of explanation though because illness prevented me from taking part in the previous round of discussions in Strasbourg.
We did not vote in favour because we feel that all too often the development cooperation within the Commission is still regarded as a stopgap measure.
When I read in the Commission documents that integration into the globalised world is the name of the game for poor countries, then I am afraid we overlook the fact that we, i.e. the western economies, are the ones pushing globalisation, and that we are therefore not actually seriously doing anything about what we regard as our number one priority, i.e. fighting poverty, because we often cause the very poverty we then seek to fight.
I did not vote against this report because it embraces a number of worthwhile issues and because I want a robust line to be taken.
I advocate maintaining Community development cooperation at EU level but I am afraid that if the reforms do not go well, it will add grist to the mill of those who actually want to renationalise all the aid programmes.
As far as I am concerned, Parliament has missed its chance to make a serious contribution to the analysis of the errors, and we should also have spent more time on a clear analysis of the remedies proposed by the Commission.
I regret this and that is why we abstained from the vote as a group, because we feel that the NGOs have done badly out of it.
I would like to close with a procedural motion.
I have now heard all the judgments on the voting of my fellow Members on all kinds of subjects imaginable and that is why I have taken the liberty of ignoring your rap on the knuckles to some extent, because I thought it is going a little over the top to stay here especially to have your say on everything once again, even though we all have our thoughts on these things of course.
Thirteenth and last explanation of vote, Madam President, by the Pensioners' Party today, 30 November 2000, on this document relating to cooperation and development.
I have voted in favour of this document, even though - and I say this loud and clear in this session of the European Parliament in Brussels - I believe that, now that we are spending European money to help the poor and less fortunate in developing countries, we should decide to appoint European ambassadors in these countries to supervise how this money is spent.
This is absolutely essential!
That concludes the voting.
Adjournment of the session
I declare the session of the European Parliament adjourned.
(The sitting was closed at 1.15 p.m.)
Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday, 30 November 2000.
Agenda
The next item is the final draft agenda agreed by the Conference of Presidents on Thursday, 7 December, pursuant to Rule 110 of the Rules of Procedure.
Tuesday:
Madam President, firstly, please allow me to express, on my own behalf - although I believe I am expressing the opinion of the majority of the House and not just of my group - that I agree absolutely with the statement that you made at the time of the proclamation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights.
I believe that it is right to point out that this is of constitutional value to Parliament and I therefore congratulate you.
Secondly, Madam President, I would like to ask you to explain to the House as clearly as possible, given the amount of contradictory information which has accumulated throughout the day, what the structure of the debate with the French Presidency will be in relation to the Nice European Council, and what approach will be taken to the participation of the President-in-Office of the Council.
(Applause)
The reports are certainly contradictory, Mr Barón Crespo.
Presumably all the more so because the Summit ended in the middle of the night, which nobody had planned.
I shall try to clarify the position.
I was told before the Summit that the President of the Republic would attend together with the Foreign Minister.
That is what I was told, but I shall seek more up-to-date information and I shall pass on your message.
Madam President, thank you very much for taking the trouble to do this.
Our information - and I wish to add straight away that I really cannot believe it - is that the President-in-Office of the Council, the President of France, will only be present tomorrow for 30 minutes in order to speak.
He may also hear Romano Prodi's intervention, I do not know, but he would not hear the remarks of the group Chairmen.
If that were the case then I would judge this procedure to be unacceptable, and it would meet with criticism from the vast majority of our group.
I am pleased that the other groups also agree.
I hope that this information is wrong, but I would ask you to convey to the French President that it is completely unacceptable for him to come here into Parliament simply to make a speech and then to take his leave and not listen to what this democratically elected European Parliament has to say.
(Applause)
Madam President, I strongly agree with those remarks.
I would invite you to convey to the French Presidency the view of my own group that a draft treaty which is worth promoting should be a draft treaty which is worth defending.
Madam President, an issue has arisen in relation to the possible tabling of a resolution on the Nice European Council.
My group' s understanding is that the Conference of Presidents did not take any decision in this regard and that the debate will be without a motion for a resolution.
I would be grateful if you could confirm this view.
Do you not want there to be a resolution?
It is not what the Group of the Party of European Socialists wants.
There was no agreement at the Conference of Presidents.
So they decided to wait and I would like that point clarified.
You are right to want to do so, because for once, as you know, I could not attend the Conference of Presidents. I was at the European Council at that very time.
Madam President, some of us were, of course, at the same meeting.
I was not present at the Conference of Presidents' meeting either.
Our colleague, Mr Friedrich, kindly represented us.
As we understand it, we need to decide here whether we want a resolution.
Our group believes that we should have a very short text now; not a definitive opinion, but a short political statement which does not conclude yes or no. We should then, at a later stage, carry out a very detailed assessment, particularly since we do not even have the texts yet.
This would mean - in my group's view - a short text this week.
We should not allow the opportunity to issue a political opinion to pass us by.
That is our group's position.
Madam President, I recognise how difficult it is for Parliament to comment on the Nice Summit when we do not have the documents yet.
There seems no possibility of our having a well-thought-through and properly argued position.
That said, this Parliament is often criticised for not keeping up with what is going on and it would be a pity if we said nothing.
So I agree with Mr Poettering: on Thursday we should pass a short resolution as a political signal after the Summit.
Madam President, at the Nice European Council, there have been two types of resolution which relate to issues which we have dealt with in Parliament, such as, for example, the status of the European limited company, the Social Agenda, maritime safety and BSE.
They are all issues on which the Council has adopted resolutions which we have been aware of sufficiently in advance and, furthermore, which we are able to assess.
However, at this time, neither my group nor any other has any knowledge of the final texts decided on by the Intergovernmental Conference and, bearing in mind that we cannot pass judgment on such sensitive issues, we believe that we should not table a resolution on the results of the Conference unless we want to express a positive or negative initial reaction, and we therefore believe it is not appropriate.
Furthermore, in order to produce a short resolution we must understand the issues very well.
Madam President, we therefore believe that it is prudent not to table any resolution and to ask the Committee on Constitutional Affairs to prepare a report on the background to the issue, which can be debated at the right time when we know the facts.
Madam President, no one underestimates the significance and scope of this summit, which has also been the lengthiest in the history of the European Union.
That is exactly why we have a problem: this is an important summit and everything we say counts.
I think hastily adopting a short resolution, as Mr Poettering proposes, would be a feeble, unimaginative solution.
So I am in favour of postponing the resolution until January.
Then we can discuss later whether this resolution should be based on a report from the Committee on Constitutional Affairs or simply on our own initiative, but, whichever, I am in favour of postponing the resolution until January.
Madam President, Nice has been a particularly important summit.
It is being commented on already and that comment will be widely reported in the press.
It would be quite inconceivable for the European Parliament, sitting the very day after the Summit, to say nothing about it.
So, Madam President, I propose that you put two alternatives to the vote: immediately discussing the Treaty of Nice, which is different from the Summit, or finding the right formula for postponing detailed comment until the January part-session.
Whatever the case, let us have a vote on it, and, personally, I support a resolution along the lines suggested by Mr Poettering, Mr Lannoye and others.
Madam President, the balance of opinion in my group was that we should not express ourselves by way of a resolution.
This is partly because we have not had sufficient chance to reflect, but also because we believe it is wrong to say that when there is a major debate, Parliament will not express itself.
I believe that Parliament will express its views vigorously tomorrow even if there is no resolution.
So I do not believe that we will be deemed to have been silent; I suspect that the presumption will be quite different when we are finished.
Madam President, this Parliament adopts resolutions on all kinds of topical and urgent problems throughout the world, and yet when something really is urgent, namely having an opinion on the Nice Summit, we hesitate.
You can make of that what you will.
Our electorate will not understand it.
Many resolutions have been adopted here in the past without colleagues even reading the texts.
Surely we will be in a position to hold parliamentary debates on texts which have been ready for months, whose content we are familiar with, whose consequences we know and whose historical importance we are fully aware of.
I believe that it is our duty to our electorate to have an opinion on this.
(Applause)
Madam President, the European Parliament can only issue its final opinion, which is both binding and a message to other parliaments - and we know from them that they are waiting for this message - on the basis of a thorough report which needs to be prepared by the Committee on Constitutional Affairs.
On the other hand, however, the people of Europe are waiting to see what we think.
This statement need not contain an opinion - a yes or no to the Treaty - but we should express our views on the critical reaction to the events in Nice, otherwise we will be excluding ourselves from a political event.
I believe that we need to be present in the discussion process of the coming week and that we should put forward our critical or perhaps also positive arguments, without drawing any conclusions.
This alone is the right way forward.
I think that, in this sense, the proposals made by Mr Poettering and Mr Dell'Alba indicate the right way forward, the way which best allows us to discharge our responsibilities.
Madam President, there has been mention of what the task of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs may be.
I must point out that the Committee is to meet tomorrow afternoon, firstly to try to really get to grips with what the conclusions of the Intergovernmental Conference were.
We shall have the chance to address the representative of the Commission in order to obtain information on the draft text of the Treaty, which we do not have as yet.
We have only just discovered that this text is not available, at least for the time being, but it might be in the next few hours.
Of course, I give no opinion on the political assessments, and the group Chairmen will be able to make their opinions known through resolutions in time.
We will also need to agree on what we mean by political assessments. It seems no easy task.
With regard to the assessments in question, I will give just one example.
The President, herself, knows that until yesterday evening, there were different views on a fundamental issue, that is, the extension of qualified majority voting and the matter of recognising Parliament' s power in the codecision procedure.
They continued working on these texts during the night, just as they continued working through the night on figures relating to the division of votes in the Council and of seats in Parliament.
At least as far as the Commission is concerned, we feel that more awareness and thought are necessary.
Madam President, the importance of the situation with which we are faced after Nice is such that I do not believe that Parliament should allow itself to be divided on the technical question of whether to have a resolution or not.
This technicality is not sufficiently important.
It is true that in this week directly following the events in Nice we in Parliament should send out a clear signal.
We could do this, as Mr Cox has proposed, through the debate alone.
But the tradition of this Parliament has it that we usually choose to do this by way of a resolution.
I have listened very carefully to what Mr Poettering, Mr Brok and others have said; all that this is about is issuing a first opinion.
It is not about casting Parliament's position in stone...
(Applause)
but about saying that we will do so after an in-depth examination of the matter by the Committee on Constitutional Affairs.
This will happen within the next one or two months.
Then this Parliament will lay down its opinion - yes or no or maybe - as it always does.
This would also make it possible - and I have agreed this with the Chairman of my group - for me to vote in favour of a resolution of this kind this week.
I believe that this would also allow the necessary agreement to be reached, if we say that we are making a statement, but that Parliament reserves its judgment and final position until its committee has tabled the report.
(Applause)
Thank you, Mr Hänsch, for that constructive contribution.
(Parliament approved the proposal)
Wednesday:
President.
I have a request from the Group of the European People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats that the report by Mr de Roo on the assessment and management of environmental noise be postponed until the January part-session.
Does anyone wish to speak in favour of this request?
Madam President, we voted on 4 December.
The report is extremely complex; moreover, Amendment No 10 and Amendment No 35 were adopted under protest.
We believe that this report needs further consideration, which is why we would ask to be able to discuss it and vote on it in January.
Does anyone wish to speak against the request?
Madam President, when we discussed this in committee, we assumed that this debate would take place in January.
After all, this is a second reading.
Discussions are still being held between the Council and the European Parliament which may make a conciliation procedure unnecessary.
For this reason, I think that it would be wise to extend the deadline - if need be - and to debate the Peijs report in January.
Does anyone wish to speak against this request for a postponement?
If not, I will put it to the vote.
(Parliament approved the request)
Madam President, in view of that decision and since Commissioner Liikanen will not be present on Thursday but could be present on Wednesday, I wonder whether it would be possible to bring Mrs Gill's report on European digital content forward from Thursday to Wednesday to fill that slot.
I should be grateful if you would agree to that request.
Madam President, I should like this put off until January 2001, if possible, as Commissioner Fischler is unable to be here because of fisheries meetings.
It is very important that he is present for this report because he is very interested in it and we are very much in the hands of the Commission for its success.
I ask that the House hold it over to January.
Madam President, while enlargement was being discussed at the Nice Summit, the French Government was practising a kind of contraction, stopping 1200 young Italians at Ventimiglia as they were on their way to take part in a union demonstration.
That was an infringement of the freedom of movement as laid down in the Schengen Agreement, and I would be grateful if you would seek an explanation from the French Government.
I think a very unusual interpretation of the Schengen Agreement was applied in that case, actually, and, no doubt, if it had been a group of bankers or a train carrying meat-and-bone meal, the French Government would have been far more tolerant.
Thank you, Mr Krivine.
We will look into the background to the ban.
Madam President, on 20 October, 200 political prisoners went on hunger strike, which they intend to see through to the bitter end, in protest against the Turkish Government's policy of using 'white' isolation cells in order to undermine morale and break down prisoners' resistance.
A further 800 prisoners are on hunger strike in sympathy.
The prisoners' mothers are also on hunger strike. Solidarity is being expressed in numerous countries.
I, personally, was horrified by the murder of a sympathiser on hunger strike by a detachment of the Grey Wolves in Rotterdam a few days ago.
I have also written to you on the subject, Madam President.
I should like Parliament to protest to the Turkish Government through you, through its presidency, calling on it to stop this particularly inhumane practice and not to isolate political prisoners.
Thank you, Mr Korakas.
I will see what I can do about that.
Madam President, I should like to request your assistance.
We have a rule in this Parliament that smoking is prohibited in certain places - that includes the Chamber.
We are going to debate the whole issue of tobacco in a few moments.
I came in here today to be greeted by huge wafts of smoke, courtesy of Mr Brok.
This is not the first time.
In the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy - as Chair of that committee - he sits there smoking.
This is not acceptable. It has a knock-on effect.
In the last Committee on Foreign Affairs meeting that I attended, other members of the committee also started to smoke.
In the interests of everyone, the rules should be respected, irrespective of the person concerned.
It is extremely important that the no-smoking rules are complied with. That includes the Members.
It is very disrespectful of them not to take this into account.
We have some Members in this Chamber who are immediately affected by tobacco smoke, for example, Mrs Lynne, who frequently complains.
Please urge the Members - in particular the Member I have mentioned - not to smoke in areas where it is forbidden.
I know exactly how you feel, Mrs McKenna, and I shall undertake to ensure compliance with the rule.
Tobacco products
The next item is the recommendation for second reading (A5-0348/00) on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, concerning the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council directive on the approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States concerning the manufacture, presentation and sale of tobacco products [9448/1/2000 - C5-0431/2000 - 1999/0244(COD)] (rapporteur: Mr Maaten)
Madam President, we are now discussing this directive for the second time this year, and once again, a large number of amendments have been tabled.
This would have been completely unnecessary, of course, if the Council had taken more notice, or indeed any notice, of our first reading and the amended proposal from the Commission, which went some way towards our goal.
I am happy to say that since then - partly through the good offices of the Commission - the entire Presidency has shown willing and I believe the positions have moved somewhat closer together after all.
Legislative procedures do not take place in a vacuum; as the negotiations for the framework agreement on tobacco control in the World Health Organisation have shown, there is a worldwide trend towards increasingly far-reaching control of what the World Health Organisation refers to as the tobacco epidemic.
Madam President, how far should we take this?
How far are we allowed to take it?
I witnessed the concern expressed in our Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market over the implications of the ruling of the Court of Justice of 5 October for the directive concerning tobacco advertising, and I echo the view that it will have a considerable impact on this directive and also on EU public health policy in general.
I also feel that the arguments for closer involvement of the European Parliament, i.e. greater transparency and better democratic control, have gone from strength to strength.
Adjustments had to be made to the draft directive and some have been proposed this time round as well.
I just think it is a shame that our Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market has been unable to make a constructive contribution in terms of the content of the directive.
I would be most interested to hear the Commissioner' s view of the issues surrounding this legal basis.
I think it is important for us to know what he thinks.
The political basis is clear: harmonisation of the market whilst maintaining a high standard of public health and consumer protection, and building on existing legislation and advanced scientific knowledge.
We really must strengthen the functioning of the internal market, for example by mutual recognition of test results and the development of common standards.
Those who adhere to them would not then be required to fulfil various additional conditions depending on which country they happen to be in.
This is not a crusade against smokers, nor is it a ban on smoking.
That would be undesirable and would also be unworkable in any case.
What we are aiming to do is to achieve an enhanced sense of personal responsibility, and hopefully help deter young people from smoking.
According to the World Health Organisation, there are 1400 smoking-related deaths annually in the European Union.
That is almost one per minute.
Eighty per cent of new smokers each year are below the age of 18, and the majority of them are young women who predominately smoke the so-called 'light' cigarettes.
So it is vital to impose a ban on these misleading descriptions, and the product must be subject to controls.
It is the most readily available product in the European Union, but we know more about the contents of a pot of jam and the ingredients of cola than we do about the average cigarette.
This directive will ensure that we at last get to know what cigarettes contain and why.
Once in possession of these facts, we must proceed to draw up a common list of permitted ingredients of the kind that already exists in incomplete form in the United Kingdom, France, Belgium and Germany.
However, I sense that the Commission is reluctant to take this step and do not really understand why.
This Parliament would like to see a commitment to drawing up this list before 2005, during the tenure of this Commission, or at least to see it proposed by then.
We therefore insist on the Member States providing the necessary information in good time.
Provision must be made to ban at an earlier stage ingredients that increase physiological dependency.
It is very important to establish maximum tar, nicotine and carbon monoxide levels.
However, I do wonder whether our efforts are going to be able to do a lot for public health standards in the long run.
Nicotine addiction is a complex matter.
The harmful effects are largely caused by the tar, carbon monoxide, and other ingredients, and we need to find out more about the damaging, but perhaps even the positive, aspects of nicotine addiction.
It is obvious that what is unhealthy for European consumers is also unhealthy for other consumers and therefore ought not to be exported.
I am willing to consider establishing a derogation for this purpose, lasting three years or so. During this time, companies would be able to make the necessary production and marketing modifications, so that jobs are not needlessly transferred to countries outside the European Union.
Health warnings need to be improved.
The European Parliament has gratefully made use of Canadian research findings, and I feel we will go further down this line in time.
We are not ready to go that far at this stage.
That said, we do feel that health warnings should be at least as big as they are in Poland, where they now cover 30% of the packet and I am disappointed that the Council did not want to go further than 25%.
Madam President, I hope this Parliament will support the amendments tabled by the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I would like briefly to deal with the consequences of the ruling of the Court of Justice of the European Communities in Case C376/98 on the directive concerning the manufacture, presentation and sale of tobacco products, currently in second reading before this Parliament.
Firstly, given the clear internal market objective to regulate the free movement of tobacco products in the Community, Article 95 of the Treaty constitutes the appropriate legal basis for this proposal.
Secondly, there is no doubt that a better motivation of the effects of this provision on the internal market will strengthen it.
In particular, there is a need to reinforce the motivation of the provisions of Article 3 on carbon monoxide maximum authorised yields in the recitals of the directive.
They should better reflect how they aim to eliminate obstacles to the free movement of goods or distortions of competition.
Finally, in relation to Article 3, allowing manufacture in the European Union only of products respecting this directive amounts to an export ban for products with higher tar, nicotine or carbon monoxide levels.
The European Parliament has therefore proposed to add Article 133 dealing with the common commercial policy to Article 95 as the legal basis.
The Commission could agree to this solution subject to the insertion of a specific article in the text of the directive which would explicitly regulate exports as such.
This would be the case, for example, of an amendment on the transitional period to be applied to exports of cigarettes not complying with Article 3 of the directive.
Mr President, when it comes to harmonisation measures, we have a choice between promoting the interests of the tobacco industry or standing up for public health. We would have no hesitation in choosing the latter.
In other words, we would make it our business to reduce the maximum yields of tar, nicotine and carbon monoxide, then we would go for decisive and striking warnings, and ban misleading wording.
We would also opt for efficient measures to deal with certain technical issues.
Despite this clear course of action, we must also be conscious of the fact that we are the Parliament of a Union that sets great store by the principles of the constitutional State, which means that we must recognise the limitations of our authority, i.e. we must know what the limits are to the authority we derive from Article 95, the legal basis we are invoking for the new tobacco directive.
Assuming I have read the judgment that annuls the advertising directive correctly, we must verify whether there is a European market for tobacco products.
Then we must verify whether there are obstacles to the internal market, or whether they could arise, realistically speaking.
Thirdly, we must check whether the stipulations we approve will really help to improve the functioning of the internal market and whether they are commensurate with the goal to be achieved.
Fourthly, we must see whether the choices we face in terms of content will contribute to a high standard of public health protection, because that is another of our duties pursuant to Article 95.
Overall, I do not see any problem with this directive.
So I am extremely content with the answer I received in advance from the Commissioner, to a question which has also been raised in our group, as to how we should deal with the proposal to immediately incorporate an export ban on products we do not want to use ourselves, into this directive.
If this can be settled in a legally conclusive manner by adding a reference to the legal basis of Article 133 of the Treaty then I feel we should all support this solution, and I would also hope that by so doing, we will not encounter annulment rights at a later stage.
In any case, the fact is that if it should transpire now, or further down the line, that we are not going to be able to secure the export ban, then we must do everything in our power to see that this is done subsequently.
Because for ethical reasons, nobody in Europe can accept that products we do not consider good enough for ourselves, and that we do not want to allow Europeans to use, can, without further ado, be exported to Africa, for example.
There must be no question of something like that happening.
So the ban must be imposed at some point.
Let us hope we can do it now.
Mr President, to finish I just have this to say.
Mrs Martens was the spokesperson for the PPE-DE Group.
There are serious reasons as to why she will arrive a little later here today.
She is hoping she will still be in time to round off the list of speakers from the PPE-DE Group.
If not, I have also spoken on her behalf.
Mr President, the opportunity today to debate and subsequently vote on the Maaten report in second reading is an important one, a test of Parliament' s ability to live up to the expectations of citizens, who want institutions capable of making clear-cut decisions.
Their way and concept of life, in which the protection of health is becoming increasingly important, are at stake.
At this level, the work undertaken by the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy has been truly remarkable, thanks, in particular, to our rapporteur' s work.
One thing must be made clear: we are not adopting a legislative framework to fight smoking, which continues to be the largest cause of death in the European Union; at least for the moment this is not possible and I, personally, would have many doubts if we intended to draw on, more or less secretly, an illusory prohibitionist philosophy.
Harmonising the national laws concerning the manufacture, presentation and sale of smoking products at the highest possible level of health protection is something that we can and must do.
As has been pointed out, there are four cornerstones of this directive: limiting the content of tar, nicotine and carbon monoxide; banning descriptors of cigarettes - 'light' or 'ultra-light' - which are universally acknowledged to be misleading; uniform regulations and, where necessary, prohibiting other ingredients and additives which are often responsible for increasing the risks for smokers and, above all, increasing their addiction; quantitative and qualitative reinforcement of the warnings of the gravity of the risk taken when lighting a cigarette and trying to dissuade the young from falling victim to this psycho-physical slavery.
By merging three pre-existing directives, we are obviously staying strictly within the boundaries of improving the operation of the internal market without, however, renouncing forging ahead with a harm-reduction strategy and curbing a true scourge: smoking, which is costly in both social and economic terms.
During this second reading, we have had two main concerns: firstly, political reconciliation of the aim of protecting health with the nevertheless valid point of view of production and employment.
The example of applying new levels of toxic substances to cigarettes exported from the European Union as well, should apply to everyone.
To uphold this basic principle, we have, to begin with, proposed extending the legal basis to include Article 133 of the Treaty, but above all, we have postponed the date by which Member States will be obliged to implement it to 1 January 2007.
The second concern, of a specifically legal nature, has, on the other hand, encouraged us to increase the interdependence of the harmonisation of the market and the protection of health even further, by meticulously following the recommendations arising from the Court of Justice' s reasons for recently setting aside the Directive on advertising, reasons of which only a biased reading could lead one to conclude that the two aspects are incompatible.
We have therefore carried out fruitful and important work, especially because the distances from the common position of the Council, but even more so, from the observations which were made in the Council following the vote in the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, of which we had first-hand experience, are so small that there is a real chance for a swift and effective compromise.
To ditch, as someone has proposed, all this work and with it the opportunity to send a positive message to the citizens is, of course, a valid proposal, but at least let us have the courage to do it in the name of an explicit political reason and not hide behind formal homage to the Treaty.
We have made every effort to achieve the greatest possible unity of Parliament so that it can, as at other times, find the strength to appear to citizens as a sure point of reference, impervious to individual interests.
If this proves not to be the case, at least the responsibilities will be clear and easily identifiable.
Mr President, I am firmly of the belief that people have a right to smoke, but my personal taste is that they should do so only in the privacy of their own homes.
This rule can be applied equally to all recreational but dangerous drugs when no one but the person consuming the drug is likely to be affected.
Certainly, there is none more dangerous than tobacco mixed with nicotine and other chemicals to guarantee a very high rate of addition and dependency.
Governments have the task of ensuring that citizens have the information to make informed decisions and to exercise their free will.
Earlier this year, the Canadian Government decided to strengthen its powers of communication with its citizens about tobacco products and overcome the intense lobbying and huge financial interests of the tobacco companies by requiring that cigarette packets in Canada carry pictures depicting some of the health consequences of smoking.
Studies have shown that such pictures have a significantly greater effect in conveying concerns about smoking and the health consequences than any written warning.
I ask Members of the House to support the amendment which has been tabled by John Bowis for the PPE-DE Group, Catherine Stihler for the Socialist Group and myself.
This seeks to give the governments of European Union Member States strengthened powers to introduce such pictures on cigarette packets in their own countries.
I emphasise that we are not insisting that these pictures should be imposed on every Member State.
It simply gives Member States an additional right to introduce them.
Let people have the freedom to choose whether or not to smoke.
Let us be absolutely sure that they are informed when they make the decision one way or the other.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, 80 fatalities in Europe from new variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, and Europe, its Council of Ministers, the Commission and Parliament decide to ban meat-and-bone meal and exclude cattle over 30 months' old from the food chain without prior testing.
Better late than never.
Fifty thousand deaths a year for decades, due to the consequences of using a drug with known side-effects for which doctors and hospital departments know there is only palliative treatment, and nothing is done apart from a few timid information campaigns.
Then, when a directive does come along seeking to regulate the distribution of that drug and information about it - I am talking about tobacco - there is an outcry from some Members.
But ladies and gentlemen, if you truly acknowledged the health problems linked to tobacco, you would demand a ban on this drug, just as you continue to maintain the bans on other substances despite the fact that, quantitatively, they are far less lethal.
You are responsible for the health of millions of citizens, and also for the deaths of thousands of young people who have not been given sufficient information.
Cases have recently been won in the United States against the tobacco multinationals for poisoning people and lying about the toxicity of their products.
Now, in France, the Loire-Atlantique health insurance company has won the right to sue the tobacco industry in the courts.
But in the future, just as with contaminated blood and mad cow disease, legal action will be taken against those who knew about it and let it happen, and that means you, us, the decision makers, the legislators.
So let us do something together, just a small thing in view of how much remains to be done.
Let us reduce the levels of nicotine and tar; ban addictive substances, like ammonia which is added to the nicotine to increase addiction to cigarettes; attach legible warnings covering at least 35% of the cigarette packet to alert people to the risks and dangers of tobacco; get rid of lies like 'light' and 'ultra-light' which encourage young people, especially young women, to smoke in the belief that this makes it less harmful, when medical science now agrees that the upsurge in peripheral small-cell lung cancers which are more insidious, more difficult to diagnose and have even more tragic prognoses is linked to over-consumption of this type of cigarette; evaluate the socio-economic cost of tobacco and transform the subsidies to tobacco producers into real redevelopment subsidies benefiting, for example, the production of cereals to replace meat-and-bone meal; recognise that products intended for export should comply with the same regulations as those intended for the internal European market; raise the price of tobacco because that is a measure which has a direct incidence on consumption, especially by young people; and harmonise tax rates.
None of this amounts to a great deal, ladies and gentlemen, and it will not really damage the interests of the tobacco industry, which some people would apparently rather protect than public health.
Much more needs to be done.
In fact, this directive should be extended to products other than cigarettes, like cigars and rolling tobacco, which are no less harmful. The ban on advertising these lethal products should be confirmed, and the collective rules on no-smoking areas should be extended.
We have a lot of work to do.
I urge you to adopt Mr Maaten' s report as a first step in the interests of the health of future generations.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, after the ruling of the Court of Justice of the European Communities on the advertising of tobacco products, this report and proposal for an amended directive has been called into question from various points of view.
There are also amendments that would discard the whole of Parliament's proposal.
We are of the opinion, however, that there are very significant differences between the issue of tobacco advertising and this directive.
We feel it is self-evident that Article 95 should form the legal basis for this directive together with Article 133, as the committee are now proposing in Amendment No 1.
The directive on which the proposal builds is based on Article 95 and the issue is, of course, directly concerned with the content of products on the internal market.
We have a positive opinion of the contents of the report and support its main points.
It is particularly important to establish clear limit values for the hazardous substances contained in the smoke.
Amendment No 2 concerning carbon monoxide is, therefore, particularly positive.
We can also support the proposals concerning the size and wording of the warning text.
In this case, there is such a small difference between the different points of view that it should not be difficult to reach a compromise.
We are also in favour of the ban on habit-forming additives.
As regards export from the European Union of cigarettes that are banned within the Union for health reasons, we consider that the only reasonable and consistent solution is to put a stop to this.
There is no reason to provide special conditions and extended transitional periods where the export of cigarettes is concerned, as compared with their manufacture for use within the European Union.
The report also mentions special brands of cigarettes that are marketed as 'mild' , 'light' and such like.
This is a marketing strategy which is often misleading and which gives the false impression that these cigarettes do not carry the same risks as other cigarettes.
We do not see any reason for allowing this type of marketing and regard the committee's present position in this area as being in danger of leading to far too many opportunities for exceptions.
Even if subsidies for tobacco-growing are not regulated by this report, it is impossible not to touch on the issue, which constitutes one of the absurdities of the European Union.
It is unreasonable for the Union to put the large sums of money into tobacco-growing that it does today.
This is inconsistent, and it is becoming expensive.
This money could be put to good use elsewhere.
Therefore, the only sensible thing to do is to phase out the subsidies gradually and for the farms affected to be given help to convert to other crops.
When this report was previously discussed, the issue of Swedish snuff was brought up.
I do not consider there to be any reason to change the current rules, i.e. an exception in the case of Sweden, nor, at the same time, the right of countries which do not wish to sell snuff to uphold their ban.
I am therefore pleased that no amendment has been made to that regulation.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, we are dealing with a subject tonight which lies outside our competence.
Not for the first time, no doubt. But this time it seems much more serious than usual.
So, once again, I shall deal with the substance and not the form.
The fact is that the Court of Justice has just repealed the 1998 Directive banning advertising and sponsorship of tobacco products.
The Court held that a total ban on tobacco advertising cannot be justified in the name of the proper functioning of the internal market.
Now, in contempt of the Treaties, believing it is entrusted with a mission of salvation, our Parliament marches on, head down, to push this text through, come what may.
That attitude perfectly sums up the defects of our European institutions, always ready to go to any lengths to achieve the ideological goals they have set themselves.
But there are rules that have to be respected and we have to remember that.
History teaches us that it is dangerous to regard the goal - however noble and virtuous - as superior to the agreed rules.
The obstinacy demonstrated here reveals a striking lack of realism.
Rather than learn the lessons of the defeat suffered in Luxembourg on 9 October, we persist in taking a legally indefensible attitude.
Our group is profoundly attached to the preservation of public health, but we are worried about the consequences of such a suicidal political position.
If we do not change our approach we are likely to kill the directive.
Public health must not be put at stake in a power struggle designed to scrape together more new powers every day, to the detriment of the States.
Health is too important an issue to be used as a political tool.
So, what answers are there?
There is only one, in our opinion: learn the lessons from the Court of Justice' s decision and recognise that the European Commission unfortunately went much too far in its efforts to distort the treaties.
We must also have another look at our copy and redraft it respecting the balance called for by the Treaty
Mr President, I would like to take this opportunity to compliment Mr Maaten on his excellent report, into which he has put a lot of effort.
I believe he has successfully amalgamated the three existing directives into one new one.
It would, of course, have been much nicer if we had not had to concern ourselves with tobacco legislation at all.
However, the sad fact is that tobacco is still produced, presented and sold.
And although everyone is aware that it is bad for your health, they still use it nonetheless.
If tobacco had to be admitted to the European market as a new product, it would certainly be rejected for health reasons.
If jam or cola were as harmful as tobacco, they would certainly be banned.
I support the strict labelling proposed by the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy both in terms of the size and the wording of the health warnings on cigarette packets.
However, I think the Council' s proposal with regard to the size of the warnings on labels besides those on cigarette packets, is an improvement on Amendment No 25, since the 50 cm² limit is far too close to the surface area of a packet of cigarettes.
I still feel that messages such as 'low-tar' , 'mild' and 'light' are misleading, so I will, in fact, oppose Amendments Nos 10 and 30.
I am delighted that the ban on adding ammonia or other addictive products will be maintained at second reading.
It seems obvious to me that we must not tolerate such practices.
On a final note, I must sadly point out again that the European tobacco policy is still inconsistent.
Tobacco consumption is discouraged on the one hand, yet on the other, in excess of EUR 1 billion is spent on tobacco subsidies annually.
I would like to take this opportunity to again express my wish that this will change some day.
Mr President, I rise in defence of the workers in the industry.
We have a large tobacco industry in Northern Ireland, Gallaher's Ltd.
If this directive is adopted, at least 300 jobs will be lost.
I have studied carefully what the Commissioner said to my colleague Mr Hume: "No massive job losses in this sector.
It is not understood how a reduction in tar from 12 to 10 mg, as proposed in the present text, would have noticeable employment effects."
The key difference, however, between previous and current reductions in tar ceilings is simply that previous reductions in tar ceilings were limited to the EU.
Gallaher's has a 25% export volume.
If this directive is adopted, 300 jobs will go.
It must be said that the manufacturers will sell not one cigarette fewer than they do now, because they will transfer their business outside the European Union.
Gallaher's will transfer its business to its Russian factory and the ceilings will be ignored, but we will have exported 300 jobs.
The job losses in Gallaher's will affect workers about 47 years old on average.
In Northern Ireland, if you lose your job at 47 there is not much chance of getting another job.
This is my concern on this issue.
Mr President, given that some of us have been accused of having shady intentions for arguing that there is a lack of, or rather doubt over, a legal basis for certain articles of the directive which we are debating today, I would like to talk about interinstitutional balance.
This interinstitutional balance is a source of legitimacy for European integration.
I would also like to talk about the obligation inherent in the Treaties.
According to the Treaty, the Commission has had the obligation, for more than two months, to analyse the judgment and to draw the relevant conclusions from it.
The Commissioner today, for the first time, in his very brief intervention, has used the words "no doubt" at least three times and the words "clear" or "clearly" at least three times.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, in law, when one feels the need to say that something is clear, and that there is no doubt about it, it is because there is doubt and it is not clear. In this case there is doubt and it is not clear.
Mr President, how can it be said that a justification in Amendment No 2 respects what the Court of Justice has said, when according to that justification, in order to explain the danger to the internal market, several Member States have indicated that, if certain measures are not adopted, they would seek to legislate?
Which Member States? Which measures?
That is what we expected from the Commission, that they should tell us, that they should explain this to us.
Let us take some other examples, Amendments Nos 1, 4 and 18.
To add the legal basis of Article 133 is legally skilful, but has the Commission really considered Article 131 which is the mother article of external trade policy, and which says that that policy is intended "to increase the competitiveness of our companies" ?
How does that square with the justification in Amendment No 18, where it says that an exemption period is granted because that could seriously harm our industry?
How does that square with that same justification, which says that negotiations must be held within the World Trade Organisation?
Mr President, these doubts, these justifiable doubts, which have nothing to do with any shady or mysterious friendship with some company or other, are the reason for the vote of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, and I remember that it was 18 votes to 9.
Although I was not present, my vote, of course, supported the Committee.
Mr President, Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi has just put the Commissioner in the dock and, in this case, while we are talking about interinstitutional balance, all the Commission has done is to have tabled a proposal for a directive.
It is Parliament and the Council who have to approve this proposal for a directive and examine, amongst other things, a suitable legal basis for it.
Therefore, it is not a question of accusing the Commission of having committed any irregularity.
Above all, it cannot be accused of any irregularity because the Commission, in this case, has simply tabled a proposal for a directive which revises three previous directives on the content of certain products in tobacco and certain warnings on the packaging of those products.
Therefore, there is really nothing new here.
The only new thing is that there has been a judgment of the Court of Justice of the European Communities, of 5 October, in which the Court of Justice says that, with regard to another completely different directive, that is, the Directive on tobacco advertising, the legal basis of the current Article 95 - which was formerly Article 100a - was not suitable.
The reason why the Court of Justice deems this legal basis to be unsuitable is that it believes that, by means of this legal basis, there is a danger of attempts being made to side-step a specific prohibition in another article of the Treaty - which has also changed number: from Article 129 to Article 152 in the current text - in accordance with which, any harmonisation of national provisions was prohibited.
The Court of Justice is therefore trying to prevent any contrivance by means of which this subterfuge could be employed.
However, in this case, this situation does not apply because the proposal for a directive, like the previous directives already in force, intends, in fact, to remove existing barriers to the functioning of the internal market.
Therefore, their correct legal basis is the former Article 100a or the current Article 95.
The rapporteur, Mr Maaten, has, with good reason, proposed reinforcing that legal basis with a reference to another article, Article 133 on external trade, and furthermore has proposed a series of amendments to some of the articles with the aim of preventing this directive being challenged on the basis of the case-law established by the judgment of the Court of Justice.
I would like to point out that the judgment of the Court of Justice has been guided by too literal an interpretation of the text.
This judgment has several questionable aspects but, accepting the judgment as it stands - since we have no choice, given that the court of Justice is the highest body qualified to interpret Community law - there is nothing to prevent this Parliament from declaring itself in favour of the proposed legal basis of Article 95 with Article 133, and introducing the amendments to which I have referred, which include the rapporteur' s amendments.
Of course, on behalf of the Socialist Group, and specifically the Socialist Members of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, who voted against this majority opinion to which Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi has just referred, I must say that we consider that taking this route, rejecting the proposal for a directive, as proposed in two amendments, Amendments Nos 52 and 53, tabled by Mr Poettering, on behalf of the Group of the European People' s Party, by Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi and another 32 MEPs, would lead to a serious restriction on the European Parliament' s legislative powers.
Therefore, I am not concerned so much at the moment with health issues, which are, of course, important and considerable, as with the constraints that would result from our accepting such a restrictive interpretation of the legislative powers which this European Parliament would have.
I believe that such a restrictive interpretation would practically lead to the elimination of the legislative powers of this institution and of the Council.
I do not believe we can take such a restrictive route, that is to say, independently of the content - and the substantial content which has been highlighted by Mr Maaten and others - that there is a danger that, if this Parliament and the Council accept the restrictive interpretation proposed by the leader of the European People' s Party and Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi, this Parliament, the Council and the Community institutions as a whole would be tying their hands and feet with regard to the legislative development of the Community institutions, which is so important to the development of Community law.
For this reason, we Socialists support the amendments tabled by Mr Maaten and we reject, of course, Amendments Nos 52 and 53 by the Group of the European People' s Party.
Mr President, it is regrettable that despite all the efforts made by rapporteur Maaten, we must conclude that no one is really happy with the developments that now characterise this report.
I would like to make three brief comments.
My first comment concerns the legal basis.
The Court has had a judicial review carried out and states quite explicitly that Article 95 can be the legal basis in some cases, provided certain conditions are met, but also states that Article 95 will not be sufficient in certain cases, for example Article 133 would need to be added where the export ban is concerned.
In view of the lack of motivation, I therefore support the amendment tabled by Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi, which calls for us to reject the common position and ask the Commission to submit a new proposal.
As for the other comments, I would point out that we ought not to concentrate too much on symbols that do not tackle the root cause of the problem.
Imposing higher taxes is not a satisfactory way of discouraging people from doing something.
Increasing the space for warnings out of all proportion is not a satisfactory way of achieving the desired goal, i.e. better public health.
What is more, I feel this will set a poor example if we want to put warnings on other products at a later stage.
Mr President, we all know that this is an unusually important report we are dealing with here.
It is important because we are here and now considering just how credible the European Union' s policy on public health is.
I am sorry that the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market has also expressed opinions that the Court ban on tobacco advertising would in some way render this directive null and void.
By no means is that true, as this directive concerns the content of cigarettes and not measures to promote tobacco sales.
Parliament should no longer be deluded in this matter; it should understand that it is now vital to show support for Mr Maaten' s excellent report.
Now to the matter of whether the words 'light' or 'mild' on brands of tobacco should now be banned.
We should keep to our opinion that such misleading descriptions cannot be allowed, and the decision of the Court in October brings nothing new to this matter.
We must maintain the stand we took on this before.
We must understand that all those countries that have undertaken to draft fairly tough legislation on tobacco have clearly seen deaths from lung cancer and heart and vascular disease brought under control.
We should be able to promote all of this in the European Union' s common single market policy as well, which must be based on high standards of protection when it comes to public health.
Mr President, if this proposal actually becomes law at second reading, this will lead to companies' freedom being curtailed somewhat, and to a slight improvement in the protection of public health.
The strength of this proposal resides in the fact that it is not concerned with the behaviour of individual consumers of tobacco products, but is aimed at making it compulsory for companies to provide all consumers with information, and having the addition of addictive ammonia banned.
This would make it less easy for the impression to be created that you can smoke without risking premature death.
It would be more difficult to spread reassuring lies.
The weakness of the proposal resides in the fact that it places heavy emphasis on the promotion of free competition.
The imposition of uniform standards in all Member States seems calculated to give the various tobacco companies the same opportunities to earn money throughout the EU.
This liberal basic principle does not have my group' s blessing.
Our main concern is to protect people against the damage that tobacco products do to their health.
My group would rather the proposal had taken an all-encompassing approach.
Taking public health as the starting point, this would entail a complete ban on advertising and sponsorship and reducing to a minimum the number of young people who take up smoking.
We would also need to look at what impact a reduction in the production and consumption of tobacco would have in terms of alternative employment for tobacco farmers and tobacco industry workers, how to put an end to the current EU subsidy regime for tobacco cultivation, and what we need to do to oppose international trade in this unwholesome product.
As long as we fail to do this, each and every European measure can be counteracted by increased exports of American tobacco.
All we can adopt at second reading is a watered-down version of the most far-reaching proposals that we voted on six months ago after the first reading.
A watered-down text was adopted back then too, but the Council of Ministers still thinks that Parliament' s opinion goes too far.
I represent those members of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left who supported the rapporteur' s proposals at first reading, and who will also support his watered-down proposal at second reading.
The proposal is too weak, but without a decision of this kind tobacco products will be able to destroy even more lives.
Mr President, it is fair to say that we have a moral obligation to fully inform the 30 million consumers of the European Union about the public health dangers of cigarettes.
Indeed, as a Member of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy I have been strongly lobbied by various groups about the need to regulate more strictly the sale and presentation of tobacco products in Europe.
I welcome the amendments which were passed in our committee recently, which sought to increase warnings to the general public about the dangers of smoking.
Amendments approved by our committee were to increase the size of the general warnings such as "smoking kills", on the front of cigarette packages from 25 to 30% and to increase the size of additional warnings on cigarette packages from 25 to 40%.
Examples of the additional warnings supported by the Committee for inclusion on cigarette packages are: "half of smokers die younger"; "smoking causes fatal lung cancer"; "smoking is highly addictive"; "get help to stop "; and "protect children, do not make them breathe your smoke".
Our committee also believes that warning messages should be attached to vending machines.
Research has shown that the greater the size of the public health warning on cigarette packets, the greater the reduction in the level of cigarette smoking.
The results of the research on that matter are so clear that it would be wrong for us, as European Union legislators, not to follow such advice.
We need to send out a strong message about smoking to the 370 million consumers of the European Union and we are going to give our children and smokers all the necessary public warnings about the health dangers of cigarette smoking.
In conclusion, since the Treaty of Amsterdam the European Parliament has the power of coordination over environmental and consumer protection matters, and it will, of course, work closely with the Council and the Commission in this regard.
We regard this procedure as an important legislative weapon of Parliament's arsenal and we intend to use it.
I compliment the rapporteur on the report.
Mr President, whilst one cannot but laud the good intentions of Members who support this directive, I should point out that the prohibition on the manufacture of tobacco above EU limits will have a significant effect on jobs in my region.
In particular, I refer to the British-American Tobacco plant in Southampton, which produces all its cigarettes for the non-EU market.
With the advent of this directive, the manufacturers will not be able to produce these cigarettes, even though the EU limits do not, of course, apply to their markets.
However, this does not mean that these cigarettes will not be manufactured.
The company concerned, BAT, will transfer production to non-EU countries.
So, instead of exporting cigarettes we will be exporting jobs - 4 000 of them in my region alone.
Yet, ironically, I do not see in this directive any prohibition on growing tobacco within the Community - even when in countries such as Greece the tobacco grown is so strong that under this directive it would become a criminal offence to use it for manufacturing.
A Community which subsidises this tobacco-growing and then makes it unlawful to sell it, whilst destroying jobs and the lives of ordinary people who rely on revenue from goods which are not even sold in the Community, cannot gain the respect of ordinary people.
Whatever you think of this directive, please support my amendment tomorrow which takes out the prohibition on manufacturing for non-EU export.
This directive will have no health benefits whatsoever outside the EU.
It is a classic symptom of political correctness gone mad.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, first of all I should like to correct a misapprehension: the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market rejected the directive as a whole as early as the first reading, although it is true that Parliament did not go along with it.
Following the European Court of Justice ruling the Committee then adopted the opinion again, admittedly this time by a large majority.
It is true that the Court's ruling did not, in fact, significantly change the legal position, but it did develop it; some aspects have now been clarified and some points are clearer.
In fact, it does not actually have anything to do with tobacco: the European Court of Justice's judgment might just as well have been handed down in relation to an advertising ban on alcohol, for example, or an advertising ban on chocolate, because we know that sugar can also be damaging to human health.
In my opinion, the superficial way in which the Commission and the Council of Ministers have examined this Court ruling in their discussions hitherto is shameful.
In fact, it would be truer to say that they have not examined it at all; they have completely ignored it, as Commissioner Byrne did just now, and as is also the case, for example, in the statement of reasons for the common position, in which it was not deemed necessary even to correct and make some adjustments to the recitals either.
The only laudable exception is Parliament's Legal Service.
Unfortunately, time does not allow me to go into detail here; that is quite impossible.
I can only call on colleagues to go along with the recommendation of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market.
This is not about the tobacco industry; quite simply it is about upholding the Treaties.
Neither is it about legalistic hair-splitting; it is about an eminently political question, which it does not require any legal training to answer. It is simply about respecting areas of competence and safeguarding subsidiarity and also, for example, the rights of colleagues in the national parliaments, who, of course, are entitled to have their own areas of competence.
This very issue of delimiting competences was addressed in Nice.
But if whenever a material majority is found on a specific issue in the three bodies - the Commission, the Council of Ministers and Parliament - this majority is also observed, then we can do without this ceremony and it would suggest that what really matters are institutional safeguards.
I hope and assume - and here I am also placing my trust in the European Court of Justice - that it will continue to hold its previous course, that it will agree to step up its efforts to safeguard competences and that, for this reason, it will once again annul the directive.
Mr President, to begin with I would like to congratulate Mr Maaten on a splendid report.
I also think there is reason to thank Mr Byrne for a very clear presentation of the legal basis.
When I listen to Mrs Palacio and also to Mr Lechner I am reminded most of all of the reports we are receiving from American courts right now.
A serious mixture of law and politics, which, in any case, does not increase legal certainty.
I believe that reducing the limit values for the tar content and reducing some of the limits for how much nicotine and carbon monoxide cigarettes may contain will have an extremely significant effect on health in Europe.
It is important to insist that the Commission draw up a proposal for a common list of additives by the end of 2004 at the latest.
The secrecy on the part of industry surrounding additives which we have witnessed so far should naturally be brought to an end.
I also consider it important that, independently of this common list, a ban is imposed on the use of ammonia and other similar compounds used for the express purpose of making cigarettes more addictive, to increase dependence on cigarettes.
This is also something we must put a stop to in an effective way.
Finally I would like to make a single comment concerning the matter of exports.
I simply do not understand why a majority here in Parliament want to propose more lenient rules for exports than those proposed by the Member States' own governments - the governments which, however, also represent the many industries referred to.
Like Mrs Thyssen, I feel that it is absolutely unethical for us to sell cigarettes outside the area of Europe which, for health reasons, we consider to be unsuitable for use by citizens in our own area.
It simply cannot be ethically justifiable to act in this way, and I therefore hope that on this point we arrive at the responsible line which I believe the Council and the Commission have proposed.
Mr President, I think that we need to make the requirements for the manufacture and sale of tobacco tougher and that to do so in a harmonised fashion, by means of a directive which must be respected by all the Member States, could strengthen the objective of preventing consumers from taking up smoking and of protecting them from this habit.
Nevertheless, I truly consider it to be unacceptable to interpret the differences in criteria with regard to the content of the proposal for a directive in terms of a supposed confrontation between the powerful interests of the tobacco lobbies and the common interest of protecting consumers.
To accept this would be to misrepresent the legitimate arguments of a good number of Members of the European Parliament who see, in the need to respect the legal aspects, a guarantee of the future viability of our own legislative acts.
If we believe that we need common rules which are legally binding in order to better protect the public' s health from the risks of tobacco, let us seek a way of doing so, without using loopholes in the law, without back doors through which our good intentions may escape.
Public opinion cannot and must not be fed solely by political gestures which are not solidly based in the reality of what is possible within the competences conferred on us by the Treaties.
Mr President, smoking is the tragedy of our time - the biggest cause of preventable illness and disease across the European Union.
More than half a million people die needlessly each year in the European Union and the number is set to grow if we do not act now.
That is why this directive is so important: bigger, bolder, clearer health warnings, a ban on misleading descriptions such as 'light', 'ultra' and 'mild', a maximum tar content for products used in the EU as well as for exports, and, for the first time, a disclosure of ingredients.
As a relatively new Member of this House it struck me how strong the forces against this directive are in this Parliament.
There have been so many red herrings thrown into this debate that I think many people would be more comfortable in a fishing debate than in a public health debate.
The power of big tobacco companies is all too evident.
I say to each and every one of my colleagues, tobacco is like no other product.
You become addicted and it kills you.
It is a fact that 80% of people start smoking before the age of eighteen yet the tobacco industry says people make adult choices.
It is a fact that 80% of smokers want to stop but there are few policies within the tobacco industry to help those people stop.
Instead it pretends to tackle youth smoking.
If we had known at the outset what we know about tobacco now, it would be an A-class drug.
It is a fact that in the last century almost twice as many people died because of tobacco than in the two world wars put together.
If we do not act now, worldwide deaths are estimated at one billion this century.
Let us make sure that the fight to save lives is paramount and play our part in tackling the power of big tobacco interests, which only destroy lives.
Mr President, nobody wishes to play down the consequences of smoking on human health, but even if you want this measure and share the health policy objectives, the legal bases have to be right.
The European Court of Justice recently handed down its judgment in the case of regulating tobacco advertising to protect human health and it is unambiguous: it is not the task of the Commission and the European Union to regulate these matters, but of the Member States.
Only if the internal market is disrupted does the Union have regulatory powers.
But the Commission has not submitted one single piece of evidence to show that the internal market is disrupted, not one.
Quite the opposite. Where it actually is disrupted, with the different taxation rates and the special rules for Greece, everything is staying as it was.
It is therefore ridiculous for people to act here, Commissioner, as though the ruling of the European Court of Justice had not changed anything.
This ignorance really is staggering.
I predict that this directive, too, will fall before the European Court of Justice, and Parliament and the Commission will make a fool of themselves just as they did the first time, if we are not prepared to examine the legal aspects.
Commissioner, you are a Guardian of the Treaties and not someone who can overstep your competences here on your own initiative.
If you enlist Article 133 for the export ban then the conclusion is obvious that it is not part of a common commercial policy to dictate to third countries what they should import.
This legal basis, too, is completely worthless in my opinion, and that is why the unions, companies and colleagues here are right to refer to job losses.
Ten thousand jobs because of the export ban alone, 8 000 of which are in the United Kingdom, are at stake.
This does not help anyone to achieve their objectives because production is not reduced, it is just moved.
We are seeking to dictate to others how they should live.
This is presumptuous and it will not become law.
Mr President, tobacco wrecks lives.
To the shame of this European Union, we require our taxpayers to subsidise the growing of the wretched stuff to the tune of over EUR 1 billion a year.
At the same time, we jeopardise sensible measures to deter smoking, especially among young people, because we try to put the whole world within our single market.
If we insist on telling other countries what health standards they should set by extending our sensible proposals for the domestic market to exports, we shall put all Mr Maaten's good work at risk.
Because, as sure as export night follows advertising day, there will be another challenge in the courts, and not just the export provision but the whole directive with it will be thrown out.
I should like the Commissioner to clarify whether the removal of the exemption for exports applies just to the tar and nicotine levels, as was the impression given in committee, or to all the proposals in the directive.
We need to know because thousands of jobs are at stake in Darlington, Nottingham, Southampton and Belfast.
Those jobs could be destroyed very quickly by our misunderstanding and our vote.
I want to see sensible measures go through and not lost.
I want to see an end to misleading descriptions such as 'mild' and 'light' that give the impression that some cigarettes are safer: deeper inhalation means they are not.
These labels should go.
There should be no exemption for trademarks or we will simply create new anomalies in competition and the single market.
I want to see the photographic warning option, sensible listing of ingredients, Europe-wide research, health promotion measures to help children to remain smoke, tar, nicotine and addiction free.
I do not want to see all this put at risk because we tried to take this measure beyond the legal powers of this European Union and this Parliament.
Mr President, the tobacco directive addresses two points that are very dear to my group' s heart: the harmonisation of the internal market and public health.
Health organisations are justifiably calling for more protection for public health.
Hence, we are all in favour of the directive and of reducing tar, nicotine and carbon monoxide yields.
That is also why we approve of increasing the size of the warnings, in accordance with the common position, and why, as per the common position, we favour short, pithy warnings on cigarette packets and support a ban on the use of misleading words such as 'mild' , 'light' , and 'ultra-light' .
Only where these terms are part of registered trademarks which are already marketed could consideration be given to granting derogations.
The industry complains about the inequality and inefficiency of the present legislation.
The inequality concerns the permitted ingredients, for example.
We readily support the proposal to produce a list of permitted ingredients.
The testing procedure is inefficient.
As matters stand, each product has to be re-tested in each country.
We are in favour of devising a standardised testing method recognised by all EU Member States, to be implemented by an approved testing laboratory.
We would also like a test of this kind, carried out in a laboratory recognised by a Member State, to be valid in all EU Member States, as is customary in the field of medicine, so as to cut down on the number of tests performed on animals, for example.
We would ask that special consideration be given to the position of SMEs.
This is hit disproportionately hard by the directive in some cases, specifically by Article 6(1).
We will therefore vote in favour of the amendment that does request information on the ingredients used, but which proposes a more realistic working method than is outlined at present in the common position.
I have the following to say about the legal basis.
The directive builds on three existing directives on the same subject which have the same legal basis.
These have never caused problems with regard to the legal basis hitherto.
The legal services of the EU institutions do not foresee any problems in this area.
We will certainly assume the legal basis to be valid once Article 133 has been added.
Naturally, we want to follow correct legal procedures and it would, of course, be regrettable if the Court were ultimately to reject the position of our legal services, but we cannot afford to discard the directive because then we would have nothing, all the work would have been for nothing and we might as well start all over again with the same old work and the same texts.
As far as Parliament is concerned, the important thing now is to show political courage and produce a directive which improves the functioning of the internal market and provides maximum protection in the field of public health.
Mr President, I am grateful to my group for being willing to allow me extra time.
I would very much like to thank the Commissioner for his comments on the legal basis.
For brevity' s sake, I would like to echo what Mr Medina Ortega and Mr Lund had to say on the matter.
I do have two additional comments to make.
The first concerns Article 11.
The reports produced by this committee are crucial in terms of future policy.
I am also delighted that this Commissioner is responsible for it.
I do have my concerns as to whether the Commission has the capacity to work on this report.
I am hoping the Commissioner might reassure us that an increase in the level of staff support within the Commission is on the cards.
Finally, Mr President, major alterations must be made to the Council' s common position.
It is important in terms of the legal basis, more far-reaching harmonisation of the market, better consumer protection and so on.
Each of these elements in isolation probably lacks sufficient support here in Parliament for a qualified majority to be achieved.
But as a package, it should lead to better balanced and more results-orientated legislation.
There was also a readiness to compromise within the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy.
I have in mind Mrs Martens and Mr Sacconi and our cooperation with them.
I therefore urge you to support this compromise package.
Mr President, I wish to begin by relating a little of the history of how this directive came before Parliament.
This directive was introduced to take account of the European Parliament's Valverde López report of 1997 which mentioned many of the elements of the present text and called for a proposal from the Commission.
The second reading debate on this proposal marks very swift progress.
It shows the urgency with which the Council of Ministers and Parliament have both dealt with this matter.
I should also like to stress the efforts made by the rapporteur, Mr Maaten, to advance with this file in a balanced and conscientious way.
The health effects of tobacco use are now widely recognised and there is a shared feeling among legislators and the public alike that the time has come to adopt stringent rules and regulations on this product.
The proposal contains some significant improvements on the present legal situation and aims to create harmonised rules on a series of product regulation issues.
On others, the groundwork has been put in place to gather the elements needed for subsequent initiatives.
One of the principal improvements concerns a new lower tar ceiling and, for the first time, a carbon monoxide and nicotine ceiling in cigarettes.
Controversially, these ceilings would cover all products manufactured in the Union, whether for domestic consumption or not.
The arguments which have been presented about possible job losses have been carefully weighed against the certainty that if we act otherwise we would be exporting a product not considered good enough for Community citizens.
I might also mention that the figures put forward for potential job losses were already an issue when the original directives now being recast were proposed over ten years ago.
The job losses then forecast never occurred.
In fact, the main job reductions in this industry are due to increased investment in automation, as the firms themselves have declared.
The Commission would nevertheless see an argument for an extended transitional period for the application of the rules for exported products, in order to allow more time for manufacturing formulae to be changed and new marketing approaches to be undertaken.
Mr Bowis asked whether the exemption would apply.
The exemption would apply to Article 3, as I understand the amendment, i.e. tar, nicotine and carbon monoxide levels.
As regards the question of descriptors, I would stress that the effect of the use of certain terms such as 'light' , 'low-tar' and 'mild' can be very misleading.
People change from one type of cigarette to another under the false assumption that the 'light' cigarette is safer for their health.
This is also a factor in why people continue to smoke instead of trying to stop.
Therefore, the need to regulate in the interests of consumers is clear.
Indeed, in the negotiations presently under way for a World Health Organisation framework convention on public health, the same provisions are currently proposed.
Consequently, the Community rules will fit well into the future international arrangements, avoiding the danger of trade barriers and reinforcing, at the same time, the protection of consumers and ensuring a high level of health.
I should add that the European Court of Justice has stated in its judgment on Case 376/98 that public health provides a legal basis in addition to and in association with its Article 95.
In fact, I would draw your attention to the judgment of the Court.
I am not fully convinced that everybody here who has pronounced on the issue has read a copy of the judgment.
I would recommend it to those who have not.
For instance, Paragraph 88 of the judgment further states: "Furthermore, provided that the conditions for recourse to Article 100a [that is now 95] and 66 as a legal basis are fulfilled, the Community legislature cannot be prevented from relying on that legal basis on the ground that public health protection is a decisive factor in the choices to be made.
On the contrary, the third paragraph of Article 129(1) provides that health requirements are to form a constituent part of the Community's other policies, and Article 100a(3) expressly requires that, in the process of harmonisation, a high level of human health protection is to be ensured."
I also refer you to Paragraph 98 of the judgment.
Let me read that in the context of the challenge made to me as to whether there is a substantial legal basis or not.
"In principle, therefore, a directive prohibiting the advertising of tobacco products in periodicals, magazines and newspapers could be adopted on the basis of Article 100a of the Treaty with a view to ensuring the free movement of press products, on the lines of Directive 89/552, Article 13 of which prohibits television advertising of tobacco products in order to promote the free broadcasting of television programmes."
It is quite clear from the judgment that the judges took the view that Article 95 could be used as a legal basis for regulating the internal market.
In fact, in coming to their conclusion as to what was the appropriate judgment in this particular case, they took the view that some aspects of regulating the market in tobacco and advertising could be permitted and some not.
They went on to say in Paragraph 117 of the judgment: "As has been observed in Paragraphs 98 and 111 of this judgment, a directive prohibiting certain forms of advertising and sponsorship of tobacco products could have been adopted on the basis of Article 100a of the Treaty.
However, given the general nature of the prohibition of advertising and sponsorship of tobacco products laid down by the directive, partial annulment of the directive would entail amendment by the Court of provisions of the directive.
Such amendments are a matter for the Community legislature.
It is not therefore possible for the Court to annul the directive partially."
That is a very important paragraph in the judgment of the Court.
It clearly indicates that the decision taken by the Court was such that it said: some of this is permissible, some of it is not.
Given the general nature of the directive, we cannot sever one from the other and, therefore, we have to strike it all down.
There is a clear signpost here as to how we can move forward on these issues.
In answer to the question on exports that Mr Bowis asked me earlier, it is quite clear that, in the unlikely event that the aspect of the directive that refers to exports is challenged and if the view of the Court - which I do not predict - is that it is not supported by the legal basis, it is clearly severable from the directive.
Therefore, even in those circumstances, the directive would survive.
In this respect, let me point out that, from the point of view of international and Community rules, there is no exception for registered trade marks in measures taken for public-health protection, particularly here, where the effects on smokers' behaviour are so dramatic.
On ammonia, let me say that the Commission considers a ban to be very premature and cannot find a scientific argument for such an approach at this stage.
It would be preferable to wait until the overall question of additives is dealt with in the first Commission report.
However, it is also clear that concern on this question is fuelled by internal company information released through court proceedings.
It would not be prudent to ignore this data.
That is why the Commission proposes to deal with the ammonia issue in a measured way, after seeking scientific advice and having considered all the available information.
It will, in particular, report on the alleged use of additives to increase the addictive nature of tobacco products.
On the issue of additives in general, the Commission is ready and willing to give priority attention to this issue on the basis of the information it receives from manufacturers and importers. This was said in the declaration made when the common position was adopted.
To do so before we have the necessary data would be speculative and premature.
We need to have sufficient time to analyse this information and to consult expert opinion.
In addition, the Commission wishes to preserve its right of initiative under the Treaty in this respect.
On the size of the warning labels, I am sure that a satisfactory compromise can be achieved, based perhaps on the Commission's amended proposal of June, which already went towards the amendments made at first reading.
The use of coloured photos to accompany texts is perhaps premature and not fully evaluated at this stage.
The Commission would prefer to examine the available data and report back in due course.
The creation of a maximum-sized warning label for some large packs would be a proportionate solution.
Mr Davies said in relation to the coloured photographs that Member States might be given permission to have this form of advertising on the packet.
I do not agree with that view for two reasons: firstly, this would run counter to the concept of harmonisation, which is the justification for using Article 95 as the basis; secondly, even if Member States wanted to advertise in this way, it does not require any sanction or authorisation by legislation at EU level to do so.
The issue of vending machines falls outside the scope of this text but the Commission would be willing to examine it in another context to see what approaches would be possible.
This is linked to the question of access to products, in particular where machines are situated in unsupervised areas.
On the amendment dealing with GMOs, the Commission considers that this would be better dealt with as an additional recital rather than mentioning it in an article by itself.
On laboratory tests, the amendment dealing with approval of tests is superfluous as another article provides for circulation of goods that are in accordance with the provisions of the directive.
We also need to make provision for results of tests to be controlled where necessary.
As regards frequency of notifications by industry, it seems clear that annual notifications are unnecessary.
On the common agricultural policy, this is not an issue touched on by this text and to mention it in the recitals would not be legally sound.
In any case, a full review of the common agricultural policy on tobacco is scheduled for 2002.
On taxation, I quite agree that the price of tobacco products, and by extension the issue of tobacco taxes, is a key issue in reducing the attraction of tobacco for the young.
However, this aspect is not the subject of the present directive.
We have to be careful not to introduce elements which are not covered by the internal market or common commercial policy legal basis.
The Commission reports on the application of the excise directives address this problem in the proper way.
Finally, a total of 54 amendments have been tabled in the report and of these I am pleased to inform you that the Commission can accept 33, either totally or partially.
It cannot, however, accept the following amendments: Nos 6, 8, 9, 16, 19, 20, 25, 28, 32, 33, 36, 37, 38, 40, 45, 46, 47, 49, 52, 53 and 54.
Thus, the amendments that the Commission has accepted will make this a much improved text and take account of the main concerns expressed by Members.
I should again like to thank Members for their positive contributions and Mr Maaten for his excellent work in this case.
Summer time
The next item is the report (A5-0356/2000) by Mrs Honeyball, on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive on summer time arrangements [COM(2000)0302 - C5-0322/2000-2000/0140(COD)].
Madam President, this report is very straightforward: at present, directives on summer time only last for five years, and then have to come back to Parliament to be renewed.
What this report is suggesting is that those arrangements be made permanent, so that we have summer time in place in perpetuity, as it were, rather than its having to be ratified by this Parliament every five years.
There is no good reason not to accept that in principle.
Indeed, there are many very strong arguments in favour of having summer time.
These arguments include less energy consumption; transport; hotels and restaurants, which have found planning easier; leisure activities; increasing the quality of life; and helping to prevent disruption of people's bio-rhythms.
Most Member States accept and want summer time, and thus this report is not at all controversial.
The advantage of making summer time a permanent arrangement would be to make planning easier.
Particular sectors involved in this, for example, IT and computers, transport, communications, air and rail, have said to us and to the Commission that they would find it very helpful to know that there will be summer time every year, that it will be permanent, so they can make forward-planning arrangements.
There is also a good argument in terms of the single market, where again similar planning considerations apply.
In terms of the substance of the report, what is being suggested is that the current arrangements, with summer time starting on the last Sunday in March and ending on the last Sunday in October, remain in place and are made permanent arrangements.
However, amendments have been put forward calling for a review and for a report to be produced at the end of five years.
As the rapporteur, I would recommend that these amendments be supported as they make a lot of sense.
The main argument in favour of these amendments and of a report at the end of five years actually concerns enlargement of the European Union, which, following the Nice Summit, is particularly apposite and appropriate.
The point is that if new Member States join us they may not have existing arrangements which conform with what we are proposing, and they may well need time to come into line with our arrangements and to bring about the sort of harmonisation we are proposing.
In view of the changes that we will very likely be undergoing, it would not be a very good idea to introduce permanent arrangements now, with no opportunity for a review.
That is the strongest argument in favour of having a review and therefore supporting the amendments to that effect.
There are other issues we would still like to look at, issues like energy consumption and health and safety, as they relate to summer time; but the strongest argument is undoubtedly that we want to allow new Member States the opportunity to come into line with the arrangements.
So, I would ask Parliament, when the vote takes place, to support all these amendments so that we can have the best possible arrangements for the existing Member States and for future Member States.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, the proposal for a directive on summer time arrangements that we are examining today is a good proposal.
It is a proposal based on extensive research carried out at the request of the Commission.
The results of that research are interesting in that they contradict certain generally accepted ideas.
First, most sectors of the economy have now incorporated the principle of summer time.
What is more, some socio-economic sectors, particularly IT, transport, telecommunications and tourism, have asked for the change to summer time to become permanent.
In fact, time is a basic datum which these sectors need to incorporate into their products and services.
That means they need to know about the arrangements for changing to summer time in all the Member States in advance.
Secondly, certain assumed negative effects have clearly not materialised.
Thus, in terms of health, any problems experienced are of short duration and fully reversible.
Nor do the results of the survey indicate any negative effects on animal biorhythms or working conditions on farms.
On the other hand, the research reveals other, less expected, implications.
Summer time seems to be in step with the way lifestyles are developing in our societies, due in particular to later working hours, and the extension of hours for shops, public services and transport.
The extra hour of daylight provided by moving to summer time is particularly beneficial in the tourism and leisure sector, where increases in business directly linked to lighter and longer evenings have been recorded.
Summer time definitely seems to go hand-in-hand with better quality of life, as the positive effects of the summer time period are far more significant than the transitional problems linked to the change itself.
The European Parliament has only one amendment to the initial proposal from the European Commission.
It calls for a report every five years on the incidence of the arrangements under the Summer Time Directive.
If these reports show that the summer time arrangements need to be altered, the Commission could then bring forward appropriate proposals.
The first report will be drafted by 30 April 2007, at the latest.
I do not think this amendment runs counter to the aim of the Commission' s proposal.
It will facilitate monitoring of the implementation of the time change without undermining the principle.
At the end of the day we cannot but welcome the Commission' s proposal to make the change to summer time a permanent instrument of European policy by finally establishing the summer time arrangements for an unlimited period.
Madam President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, once again I see that a far-reaching debate is raging about the pros and cons of summer time.
In the main, this is, as I see it, more of a philosophical discussion than a serious debate about a real policy of substance.
I do not therefore think that we should dwell on this matter for too long in this House; after all the Member States and also the public have already accepted the summer time arrangements to a large extent and they are acknowledged to be part of our calendar.
We should, therefore, really not rack our brains over this any longer.
In-depth research, as has also been called for in various quarters, would therefore in my opinion also be a waste of time and money.
Surely we have, as I see it, much more serious problems to cope with in Europe, such as the transport situation, enlargement and, at this very moment, BSE.
It is also obvious that there has to be agreement across the EU on when the clocks are changed because anything else - as has already been said - would lead to hopeless confusion.
I also think that the public would rightly question the point or otherwise of much EU legislation.
From the point of view of farmers - this has also already been said - repeatedly switching between summer and winter time is not exactly ideal for our farms, either as far as the animals are concerned or the actual work on the farm.
Nevertheless, I will say quite openly that there are more advantages than disadvantages in favour of changing the clocks and in favour of keeping the summer time arrangements as they currently stand.
We should leave the arrangements as they are and in my opinion prolong them indefinitely.
Consequently, I can say on behalf of my group that we do not wish to accept any amendments.
I have said this because I and my group are convinced that Europe has more serious problems and tasks to deal with.
Summer time is not the problem for our common European House.
Madam President, since the 1970s various Member States have applied the practice of switching to summer time.
The dates for starting and ending summer time were harmonised, finally, a few years ago so that they have been the same in all the Member States of the EU since 1996.
We have become used to the practice, as the previous speaker just said.
The proposal that has now been made is, in the opinion of our group, a good one, and our group supports it, and no more amendments to it are needed.
The main issue here is that summer time is applied in all Member States and that the date it starts and the date it ends remain uniform throughout the EU.
It is to be welcomed that the proposal states that matters connected with time zones and summer time provisions should be matters for Member States to decide.
Harmonisation is necessary only in connection with the practice of summer time starting and ending at the same time in each of the Member States.
A harmonised summer time will remove obstacles to the free movement of goods, services and people and promote the more effective realisation of the internal market.
Studies on the effects of summer time do not clearly reveal whether the effects, for example on agriculture, are positive or negative.
The greatest concerns are mainly to do with the welfare of animals and the working conditions of farmers.
The adoption of summer time has meant energy savings, even if they have only been very slight, according to reports.
Studies show that traffic safety has improved with the evenings staying light for longer.
Long, light evenings also mean opportunities for extended leisure time.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, it is now to be enshrined in law that summer time, which without a doubt has proved its worth, will begin on the last Sunday in March and end on the last Sunday in October throughout Europe. These provisions are contained in the Commission proposal on summer time arrangements.
In addition, for the first time the directive is to remain in force indefinitely.
This is necessary and good.
The Commission is simply required to report on the impact of the directive after five years.
It is absolutely essential to the smooth functioning of European industry, particularly in the fields of transport, communication, tourism and IT, that it have a stable and long-term framework in which to plan.
Countless statements from industrial sectors show that this long-term stability of summer time dates is urgently necessary for the harmonious functioning of the internal market.
For economic and social reasons it is simply imperative that the summer time arrangements are clear, comprehensible and long-term, so that people can plan ahead and do not need to worry that one day this policy will suddenly be reversed.
The amendments which have been tabled by Parliament and the rapporteur are therefore, in my opinion, unhelpful, because they tend to create uncertainty rather than increase confidence.
A one-off review by the Commission in five years' time will suffice.
I would therefore urge Members to adopt the same stance in Parliament as was adopted in the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, namely to confirm the Commission proposal as it stands and thus reject the amendments.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, as the darkest time of the year approaches it is heartening to speak of summer, or even summer time.
However, I would like to focus attention on this ritual of changing the clocks every spring and autumn, the purpose of which may be controversial.
Farmers have told me that the welfare of dairy cattle is a priority, and their protection is also important for milk production.
The peace of mind of ruminants is already being disturbed by mad cow disease.
Additional stress should not now be caused them through having them deviate from their normal rhythm.
Cows do not adjust to a change of rhythm in the space of just a day or two.
It also causes problems for agriculture when during autumn threshing the morning dew ought to have disappeared according to the time by the clock, but, wonder of wonders, nature has not been following the directive.
An additional problem is that not only is the natural rhythm of animals disturbed, but people' s alertness, which is partly dependent on daylight, is also affected.
I think that the Commission' s arguments in its communication in favour of the necessity of summer time are by no means watertight.
In my opinion, whether or not the arrangement is continued should therefore be re-examined as soon as possible.
It is also questionable as to whether summer time should end just before November.
In snow-white Northern Europe the memory of summer has already cooled by then.
It would be reasonable to end summer time at the end of September, approximately six months after it starts.
I am by no means totally opposed to summer time, as it also has its advantages.
Nevertheless, I would ask the Commission to deliver a critical assessment of whether summer time is necessary in the future.
I certainly believe that we could get along without it, although I am not prepared to give up the warm summer weather.
But that is something politicians fortunately cannot make decisions about.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, the proposal we are discussing today is intended to extend the existing arrangements concerning the dates and times when the summer time period begins and ends, that is, on the last Sunday in March and the last Sunday in October at 1 o' clock in the morning Greenwich Mean Time.
Allow me, first of all, to congratulate your rapporteur, Mrs Honeyball, for her excellent work and the report she has produced.
You will have noted that, compared with the earlier directives the arrangements proposed are of indefinite duration.
The study ordered by the Commission in 1999, in accordance with the commitment it gave to the Council and European Parliament when the eighth directive was adopted, concludes that the arrangements are widely accepted both by the public and by the various sectors of activity.
However, it has become apparent that adopting the arrangements for a comparatively short period could cause difficulties for certain sectors.
For example, the transport sector in particular, but also other sectors of industry, requires stable, long-term planning on account of technical requirements connected with the preparation of transport timetables.
There are also the requirements of manufacturers of computers or electronic tachographs and producers of calendars and diaries.
Last but not least, the time-consuming and expensive repetition of legislative procedures at fairly close intervals at both Community and national level should be avoided.
While these are all reasons militating in favour of adopting open-ended arrangements, as a precaution the Commission has made provision for drawing up, no later than five years after the first year of application of the directive, a report based on information supplied by each Member State.
On this point I am pleased to note that the Commission's proposal has been favourably received by the European Parliament.
As regards the amendments tabled, the Commission can agree to Amendments Nos 3 and 4 since they aim at making the system more transparent and emphasise the precautionary principle.
As regards Amendment No 1, the Commission cannot accept the part of the amendment which obliges it to make a periodic report every five years, nor the reference to the enlargement process.
It can agree to make appropriate proposals on the basis of the conclusions of the report of 2007 referred to in Article 5.
Concerning Amendment No 2 to Recital 6a, the Commission cannot accept it for two reasons: on the one hand the scope of the investigations should not be restricted to a few requirements, and on the other hand, the proposed amendment to Recital 6a does not relate to a specific article of the directive.
Nevertheless, I would like to allay your concerns by saying that the Commission will of course instruct the Member States in good time, so that they can send in all necessary information and data related to the various sectors concerned by the issue.
By way of conclusion, I look forward to a rapid adoption of the proposed directive to ensure that no difficulties are encountered in the sectors concerned.
Thank you, Commissioner.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.30 p.m.
Clinical trials of medicines for human use
The next item is the recommendation for second reading (A5-0349/2000) on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, concerning the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council directive on the approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States relating to the implementation of good clinical practice in the conduct of clinical trials on medicinal products for human use [8878/1/2000 - C5-0424/2000 - 1997/0197(COD)] (rapporteur: Mr Liese)
Madam President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, medical research which is essential for patients must be approved quickly and with minimum bureaucracy, but at the same time ethical boundaries must be strictly respected and the subjects must be given maximum protection from abuse.
This was the European Parliament's objective in the legislative procedure on clinical trials, and I believe that today we can say that this objective has been achieved.
In an informal trilogue last week, the Council told us that it could accept most of the amendments tabled by the lead committee and that there were a number of places where it wanted further drafting changes, which we can make through compromise amendments tabled by four groups tomorrow.
For a long time, it seemed as though an agreement was going to be impossible.
Positions here in Parliament were very far apart, but they were equally divergent between the Member States and the different institutions.
We have now reached an agreement and I should like to thank all those involved for their part in achieving this: colleagues, the Commission, also the Council, and, in particular, the French Presidency.
The compromises which we have agreed greatly improve the common position from the European Parliament's point of view.
There is clarification that, as a general rule, consent in a clinical trial has to be given in writing.
There is clarification that interventions in the human germ line cannot be accepted.
There is recognition that non-commercial clinical trials, which industry either cannot or will not support, are nevertheless important and that rules need to be drawn up for them.
I am particularly pleased that we have struck a very good compromise on clinical tests on people who are unable to give legal consent themselves.
This issue of research involving those who are incapable of giving informed consent has caused heated controversy in the Member States, as well as here in Strasbourg in the Council of Europe.
Positions also differed amongst those involved in this legislative procedure.
Originally, the Council did not want to include any provision in the directive at all and wanted to leave it up to the Member States.
The European Parliament decided at first reading that clinical trials of this kind should only be permitted if it could be shown that each individual clinical trial was of direct benefit to each individual patient.
Now we have found a compromise, and I do not think that it is a compromise formula or a formulaic compromise; it is a proposal supported by the facts which provides a good solution to the problem, at least in this field.
As far as the direct benefit is concerned, investigators running clinical trials have to identify those cases where it is necessary to administer medical products and carry out the accompanying examinations in order to draw conclusions for future patients.
This is an important condition which we make here in our report.
Then a distinction has to be drawn between children and adults who are incapable of giving informed consent.
Children's metabolisms have particular characteristics, which is why medicines which are administered to children also need to be tested on children in clinical trials.
This is not the case in many areas at present.
Children are given medicines which have only been tested on adults, which means that children are badly treated.
The report aims to ensure that children in Europe receive better treatment in the future, that they suffer fewer side effects and are given the right doses.
We have drawn up very, very strict rules for this.
The rules, which were drawn up in committee, which the Council will accept and which Parliament will hopefully adopt tomorrow, are stricter than those laid down by the Council of Europe in its so-called Bioethics Convention, but the rules explicitly permit research, and we think that this research - when it is conducted in accordance with the rules - is extremely important.
In this respect I am therefore happy with the compromise which has been reached.
I am unhappy with two aspects.
Originally at the first reading we had demanded a shorter deadline for authorising clinical trials, and I had hoped that the deadline of 60 days, which is provided for in the common position, would be reduced somewhat, at least for the national authorities.
You see, I believe that it is perfectly acceptable to grant a rather longer deadline to an Ethics Committee, whose work is not the main job of the people who work there, but surely the authorities should be put under some pressure to start the work quickly.
Unfortunately, it was unlikely that a compromise would be reached on this basis in the Council, and I would therefore prefer to put the compromise struck with the Council to the vote rather than having a long conciliation procedure, with perhaps no agreement at the end.
The situation is the same for the issue of whether the principal investigator should be a doctor or whether other professions should also be authorised.
Parliament continues to want doctors to be the only ones to carry out clinical trials in all of the Member States because we believe that nurses and midwives should not be active in this sensitive area even if they have additional training, and neither should biologists or pharmaceutical chemists, who may only have worked in the laboratory and not have sufficient experience with patients.
I must concede, however, that the Council was not prepared to compromise further here either.
That is why we must, with a heavy heart, agree to this compromise.
If we accept it we will still have a directive which guarantees therapeutic progress and which does not just leave the protection of patients in Europe as it is but improves it, and that is why I would plead in favour of this compromise.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, this directive, before us today for the second time, falls within the delicate context of international competition in pharmaceutical research and major health challenges, particularly in paediatric medicine.
It allows us to resolve the problem of clinical trials being held simultaneously in several Member States and at several locations.
The common position forwarded to us by the Council is some improvement on the Commission' s proposal and especially on Parliament' s first reading.
There are several points we can agree with.
Thus, the principle selected for starting a clinical trial is tacit authorisation from both the Ethics Committee and the competent authorities in the Member States.
The opinion of the Ethics Committee is determinant as it comes first and the absence of a negative opinion in fact means the trial can begin immediately without loss of time.
Finally, we agree with the Council' s proposals on labelling medicines used in such trials.
On the other hand, some other points could be improved and I am glad the Council is prepared, as I understand it, to make a number of compromises.
I do not think there can be any question of compromise on the first point, which I consider essential.
The consent of persons taking part in a clinical trial must necessarily be given in writing and if that is not possible, for example in case of temporary inability to write, a witness must be present when consent is received.
Secondly, consent must be informed, which means, in particular, that the person taking part must have been informed of the conditions under which the trial is to be conducted, the potential risks that he runs and his unrestricted right to withdraw from the trial at any time.
Finally - and I think this point is fundamental - we must ensure that the greatest possible protection is guaranteed to those who are not in a position to give their consent: the weakest, children and legally incapacitated adults.
They must be able to expect direct benefit from the clinical trial.
In particular, the opinion of minors must at least be listened to because account must be taken of their clinical and psychological characteristics.
It seems to me right not to include adults incapable of giving consent in clinical trials that could be carried out on adults who are capable.
Finally, adults incapable of giving consent should only participate in trials that relate to the condition affecting them and causing their incapacity.
So, although there are still some points of disagreement with the Council, I would like to remind you that the result we are seeking to obtain through the adoption of this directive is the outcome of lengthy and fruitful compromise negotiations between Mr Liese, our rapporteur, whom I thank and congratulate on his inclusive and constructive approach, and the Council, which has proved cooperative and open to the amendments adopted at second reading in the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy.
So after what Mr Liese has just told us, I am very hopeful that we will rapidly reach an agreement allowing us to avoid a long conciliation that would be not very productive in the end.
Madam President, I would like to join Mrs Patrie in warmly thanking our rapporteur, Mr Liese, for all his efforts to find a consensus.
We are dealing with a particularly important directive here.
It may contribute to improving clinical research in Europe and hence the welfare of millions of sick people.
The sector is sensitive.
It is a matter of scientific progress, but also ethics and morals: in short, value judgments.
Since the first reading, Parliament has concentrated on the protection of people incapable of giving informed consent to these clinical trials: children and adults with a mental handicap.
These groups must remain within the scope of the directive.
Excluding them would mean obstructing research into conditions specifically affecting them.
In some cases scientific and experimental research is their only hope.
Besides, we know that empirically dividing the adult dose to treat children has already led to tragedy in the past.
Then there is the opposite extreme, children not treated because, although the specific medicine to cure them exists, it has not been tested for them.
So we want these groups to benefit from advances in research, while laying down conditions for these trials which are as severe and strict as possible.
That is the aim of Amendments Nos 36 and 37 in particular: full and objective information, adapted to children - a point I consider very important; informed written consent from parents or legal representatives; exclusion of any financial advantage; control of protocol by ethics committees.
In these amendments we also refer, not once but twice, to the fact that the interests of the patient are always more important than those of science and society.
Children and disabled people are fragile people who need maximum protection.
But there must be no ban: these patients must not be shut out beyond the gates of hope research represents for them, sometimes the last thread still linking them to life.
One more word, on another point I consider highly important, I mean Amendment No 30 which concerns non-commercial clinical trials.
It is crucial that the directive take account of this academic research.
Nor must it be penalised. It is especially beneficial to the patients concerned.
I am particularly thinking of cancer research, but there are many others.
Madam President, I am pleased that so many colleagues have emphasised how important it is to us - and this is, I believe, the central point in this debate - to protect particularly vulnerable groups of people, namely children and those who are unable to give informed consent, and to ensure that no research is carried out which is useful to others unless it is also of direct benefit to them.
I should, however, also like to remind you that it was the Green Group which made this proposal at the first reading, in the face of much resistance - including, I am afraid, from the current rapporteur. We did so in an amendment tabled at the time which many colleagues here supported and which provided that no research should be carried out on those unable to give written consent unless it was of direct benefit to them.
It was only, in my view, this amendment, tabled by us, that made this important debate possible.
I should like to stress this once more: I am glad that the rapporteur has given ground on this point because it has allowed us to reach what I believe is a very good compromise.
This compromise, which of course can be further improved upon by each Member State, constitutes a minimum standard, to ensure that we do not have a kind of ethical dumping in the European Union and to avoid a situation where it is possible to carry out research on those unable to give informed consent in one Member State and not in others.
I should also like to stress once more that this compromise goes beyond the proposals in the Council of Europe's Bioethics Convention, because we have much greater protection for patients, with a much stronger link to their own interests, for example, consent given by a representative can be revoked at any time.
I am also pleased, however, that we have succeeded in clamping down on germ-line gene therapy.
It must be quite clear that clinical research which seeks to introduce germ-line manipulation by the back door must not be possible, because this would be a violation of human dignity.
That is why I believe that this compromise is very good, particularly when you consider that the Member States are able to introduce even stricter rules.
Through this compromise we are making it clear that there must be no ethical dumping at European level and that there must be no research which is of benefit to outsiders on those unable to give informed consent.
Finally, I should like to cordially request that the Council re-examine our amendment on placebos.
Here, as you know, we have proposed that research involving placebos should only take place if it can be proved that there is no other way of monitoring effectiveness, because we wish to avoid research taking place if there is no direct benefit, but at the same time we wish to enable research to happen.
That is why we made this proposal, and I should like to ask the French Presidency to kindly make a note to answer this question.
Madam President, health is the most precious of gifts and everything must be done to maintain and restore it.
That is why medical science should be given every possible means of properly protecting individual and public health.
Unfortunately, although the right measures are taken, they are unable to prevent new risks and diseases from emerging which the drugs available are unable to treat, and the medical community is obliged to find modern, more effective ways of meeting these challenges.
Clinical trials are a necessary step in this direction, provided that they are conducted in a way which safeguards the dignity and the mental and physical welfare of the subjects.
Current differences between the laws, regulations and administrative provisions in the Member States are creating obstacles to and competition between pharmaceutical companies in their bid to make new drugs quickly available to patients.
Hence the need for harmonisation at European level.
Because it recognises the importance of this directive, the European Parliament has endeavoured to overcome its differences rather than hold up the legislative process, focusing on the following safety conditions for clinical trials: the written consent of the subjects to the clinical trial, the consent of the guardian or an authority provided for by law and of the treating doctor to the participation of persons with impaired understanding or a mental disorder which prevents them from giving their consent, the criterion being that the expected benefits of the drug being tested must outweigh any side effects.
The participation of children in clinical trials must be regulated properly because it is a particularly sensitive issue.
Finally, and here I am dissatisfied with the Council's compromise proposals, I think that the main investigator during clinical trails should be a doctor, because only a doctor has the knowledge and experience needed in order to evaluate the benefits and deal with any side effects or risks which arise during the clinical trial.
Of course, the team conducting the clinical trial may include other specialists with the relevant qualifications.
I should like to congratulate the rapporteur, Mr Liese, on his report and thank him for his efforts to reach a compromise.
Madam President, I want to thank the rapporteur, Mr Liese, and congratulate him on the excellent report he has presented, as well as the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy on the work done.
The Commission would be happy if, after so much effort on the part of those concerned, we could achieve harmonisation, at Community level, of the requirements for conducting clinical trials.
Indeed, this is particularly important for the protection of public health.
As you know, since 1965 Community legislation on pharmaceuticals has required medicines to obtain marketing authorisation before being put on sale.
Authorisation is only granted if three fundamental criteria are met: quality, safety and effectiveness.
This requirement responds to two essential objectives: the protection of public health and freedom of movement.
Conducting clinical trials, in accordance with the principles of good clinical practice, makes it possible to test the effectiveness and safety of medicines.
Good clinical practice has been the subject of international harmonisation, in the form of guidelines adopted by the International Harmonisation Conference involving representatives of the European Union, the United States and Japan.
However, as these guidelines are not legally binding, they are applied very differently in the various Member States.
This involves difficulties both for participants in clinical trials and industrialists who want to conduct such trials in the European Union.
That is what led the Commission to propose, in September 1997, a legislative framework, based on Article 95 of the Treaty, with the aim of harmonising the procedures applying to clinical trials in the European Union.
The Commission modified its proposal in April 1999 to take account of the opinion of the European Parliament.
The common position of the Council, adopted in July 2000, is essentially based on the Commission' s amended proposal and incorporates most of the amendments suggested by the European Parliament and accepted by the Commission, which entirely appreciates the European Parliament' s concern in tabling amendments largely aimed at finalising the protection of the individuals taking part in clinical trials, especially children and adults incapable of giving consent.
Where it is essential for these groups to have medicines specially adapted to them, the challenge is to be able to carry out trials whilst ensuring their protection.
In-depth work, carried out in full cooperation between the European Parliament, the Council and the Commission, has made it possible to draft a compromise which takes account of all the points raised and indicates where positions occasionally diverge.
The Commission can accept all the compromise amendments.
In fact, they meet the Commission' s objectives, that is, the protection of public health in the eyes of those taking part in clinical trials, the need to facilitate the establishment of clinical trials within the European Union, and the need for the pharmaceutical industry to be competitive internationally.
In conclusion, the Commission can accept compromise Amendments Nos 28 to 43.
It can also accept Amendments Nos 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14, 16, 19, 21, 23 and 24.
The Commission can also accept Amendments Nos 5, 11, 15, 17, 25, 26 and 27, in principle, but on the other hand, it cannot accept Amendments Nos 4, 18, 20 and 22.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.30 p.m.
Madam President, I am pleased to hear the Commission say that in principle it can accept Amendment No 25.
But I was keen to hear whether the Council could accept it, if that were perhaps possible.
The Council clearly has no intention of answering you, Mrs Breyer.
I suppose you could contact the representative outside the House between now and 12.30 p.m. tomorrow, as the vote is taking place tomorrow.
Public health programmes
The next item is the report (A5-0377/2000) by Mr Trakatellis, on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, concerning the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council extending certain programmes of Community action in the field of public health adopted by Decisions 645/96/EC, 646/96/EC, 647/96/EC, 102/97/EC, 1400/97/EC and 1296/1999/EC and amending those Decisions [COM(2000)0448 - C5-0400/2000 - 2000/0192(COD)].
Madam President, I should like to start by saying that I am most dissatisfied with the Commission for its unwarranted delay in submitting the proposal to extend the six public health action plans to Parliament.
They include the action plan to combat cancer, the programme of action for the prevention of AIDS, the programme of action for the prevention of drug dependence and the action plan to promote health and, if they are suspended, it will mean an end to the projects and the work being carried out by the networks which have been set up.
The codecision procedure to implement the new public health action plans for 2001-2006 cannot be completed by 12 December 2000, when 4 out of the 6 programmes expire, which is why we urgently need to agree to their being extended, initially by one year and then by a second year if the new action programme has not yet entered into force.
This being the case, I agree with the rapporteur's proposal to speed up the procedures and avoid two readings by reaching an agreement with the Council and the Commission on the budget lines in question.
I trust that we shall not have to deal again with this sort of delay in such vital areas as public health in the future.
Madam President, may I start by pointing out that the programmes which it is proposed to extend, four programmes for two years' training and two programmes for one year's training, are directly related to the new health programme which is currently being discussed in the Committee on the Environment.
Unfortunately, the new programme, which will run from 2001 to 2006, is still not ready and is not expected to enter into force for some time.
Consequently, the request for an extension to the previous programmes - important programmes on cancer, AIDS, diseases such as pollution-related diseases or the monitoring of infectious diseases, i.e. programmes which are of tremendous significance to public health in general - was a logical step.
If they are not extended, we shall have a huge gap in public health issues and programmes.
We must not forget that the essence of the acquis communautaire from these programmes needs to be passed on to the new health programmes currently being drawn up and it is therefore only right that we extend them.
What we have agreed with the Council and the Commission and, of course, with Parliament's Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, so as to avoid a second reading and allow these programmes to continue without a break, thereby avoiding any gaps, is to extend the four programmes by two years, as the Commission has requested; however, the money will only be released a year at a time, so that if the new health programme is approved and enters into force in the meantime, there will be no need for an extension and the money can be used for the second year.
If, of course, the new programme has not yet begun, which I do not believe will be the case, then we shall, of course, carry on and use the money for the second year.
So that is what we have agreed; we have agreed that the two programmes which expire in December 2001 will be extended for one year and we have also agreed on the amount, which is the same, in fact it is slightly less than the amount which the European Commission originally requested.
So we have, I think, proceeded very quickly and with excellent cooperation.
I would even go so far as to say that we may well have inaugurated a new modus operandi for codecision issues.
Instead of waiting for conciliation, which takes a very long time, we have, to all intents and purposes, dealt with the conciliation in advance, a method which I would recommend to the European Commission, the Council and the parliamentary committees.
What a good idea to be able to prepare the way, to proceed as far down the line as possible, to be so close that, even if we need a second reading, we are already within a hair's breadth of a decision.
I should, of course, like to thank all my colleagues, and the other groups, and of course I should like to thank my colleagues in the Committee on the Environment, because we had a valuable convergence of opinion and were able to proceed quickly so as to avoid any gaps in the public health sector.
I trust that we shall proceed in the same manner and will use the same method for the new health programme, so that we really can make headway on these issues, and that the European integration which we talk of, constantly telling ourselves that it is not something abstract, is not the sort of integration which only applies to external relations and defence issues.
It is a series of convergences.
It is impossible to conceive of a unified European Union without convergence in the health sector and in the education and other sectors.
So I feel that, slowly but surely, we are making headway.
Of course, we know that the health sector is still the responsibility of the Member States, but the Treaties do, of course, give the European Commission a great deal of responsibility for the public health of European citizens.
So we are moving in the right direction.
I see these programmes as the first signs of convergence, a convergence which should be a straightforward task, because European citizens stand to gain a great deal from action in the public health sector.
Madam President, let me say right away that we shall be voting in favour of the Trakatellis report, but, once again, we see dysfunction in the European Union, because we are urgently adopting a link between two programmes, as if it were a surprise that programmes supposed to end in the year 2000, actually do end in the year 2000.
I agree with Mr Trakatellis: you cannot play games with patients' health when they expect our help, or with non-governmental organisations which need these Community budgets to deliver the health policies on the ground.
In general, it is high time the Member States agreed to give the European Union a greater margin of manoeuvre and a more substantial budget, on a legitimately supranational issue: diseases know no frontiers.
Above all, a framework programme should not forget the specific actions on the pretext of refocusing.
For example, even if the fight against AIDS is not fashionable, it still needs to be a priority because this tragic disease remains very present, particularly in the future candidate countries.
In conclusion, we hold that the goal of a future European strategy must be the incorporation of health issues into all the other Community policies, so as to put an end to current anomalies, like allocating 50 million euros to the fight against cancer while subsidising the tobacco industry to the tune of one billion!
Madam President, our group supports Mr Trakatellis' s very well-produced report and also the work of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy.
We believe that, as Mr Trakatellis very effectively pointed out, we need to make arrangements in order to move ahead with the implementation of programmes in progress.
Since all of Europe' s citizens are being affected by common problems relating to food, work, and various issues, it makes sense for there to be common European programmes which are becoming increasingly important in the joint combating, prevention, awareness and action in relation to these issues.
It is therefore desirable that the efforts dedicated to these matters should increase.
It is precisely on this issue that we believe there is a notable lack of direction in the European Union, in the Council and the Commission, which, with the budgetary cuts - not wanting to reach the ceiling of 1.27% which the regulations in force currently allow - is harming actions such as these at a time when coordination between the different Member States is becoming increasingly important.
We also agree with the need stated in Mr Trakatellis' s report to balance the different programmes and actions which are underway.
Furthermore, we must take account of the fact that prevention and promotion as well as monitoring are all going to be increasingly important and therefore they should be given more resources and a higher profile.
Lastly, we believe that we should try to ensure that, in the future, situations such as this do not recur, with a lack of speed on the part of the Commission in providing for the renewal of all actions on time.
This is a worrying state of affairs, which has caused concern amongst the many organisations involved and the problem should be resolved once and for all.
Madam President, I certainly support the extension of the Community health programmes until 31 December 2002.
The continuation of certain public health programmes until the end of 2002 will cost EUR 80 million.
This will mean that Community action can be taken in the area of health promotion, information, education and training, the combat cancer programme, the programme for Community action for the prevention of AIDS and certain other communicable diseases, and the prevention of drug dependence.
I believe that the European institutions, primarily the European Commission and Parliament, should be given broader powers to promote the health programmes within the European Union.
Certainly, the European Community action programme for the prevention of AIDS has done much to reduce the number of people contracting this awful disease within the European Union.
Indeed, I intend to play a central and active role in ensuring that increased funds will be made available for cancer research within the Union.
It is imperative that this budget is increased so that we can ultimately find out the cause of cancer and cure those who contract it.
The prevention of drug dependence programmes must also be focused not only on black spots, but across many other areas within the European Union.
International organisations such as Europol have estimated that the importation of drugs into the Union is actually increasing.
So the battle to defeat international drug trafficking and to defeat the importation of drugs into the Union is still a very real challenge for the years ahead.
The Irish Government runs a very successful programme called "The Young People Facilities and Services Fund" which supports the development of youth facilities and services in disadvantaged areas.
It targets those areas experiencing, or at risk of experiencing, significant drug problems.
This is an area that can be looked at in the context of the new Community health programme which is due to come on stream.
I commend the rapporteur and the report.
Madam President, subsequent to the Trakatellis report on the extension of the existing European public health programmes, I wish to express my concern at the direction in which European policy in the field of public health is developing.
We can read the basic principles for European public health policy in Article 152 of the Treaty of Amsterdam: "Community action, which shall complement national policies. (...).
Such action shall cover the fight against the major health scourges."
I would also like to refer to the principle of subsidiarity, which stipulates that non cross-border tasks should be performed by the Member States.
As I see it though, efforts have been made recently to raise the profile of public health as a relevant and fundamental topic for Europe, although this development is at odds with the Treaty.
European public health policy only comes into play if there is a cross-border issue involved or if Member States cannot implement a particular task in isolation.
Relevant examples include legislation concerning cross-border trade in human organs, tissue and blood, and the programme for orphan drugs.
Since the Member States need each other where the aforementioned examples are concerned, I am in favour of a common European approach in such cases.
There is no need for this when it comes to tackling problems such as cancer, AIDS and drug addiction.
A European approach does not lend a great deal of added value over and above the efforts undertaken by the Member States.
Certainly, when it comes to the provision of information and raising awareness, action at national level is to be preferred over that at European level.
The European Union could do more in the way of raising health standards for the candidate countries, where even basic health care is lacking.
In addition, relatively straightforward illnesses cannot be treated owing to lack of funds and other resources.
I am also perturbed by the fact that the various healthcare systems of the European Union will come up for discussion in new proposals soon to be on the agenda.
It is possible that national systems will be called into question in the process, or even adversely affected in the future, which I think would be an undesirable development.
To summarise, Madam President, I must say the developments in the public health sector in the European Union go too far for my liking.
Public health is national policy and should stay that way.
I therefore do not support public health programmes that can be used as a stepping stone to erode national policy, when the programmes currently on the table scarcely provide anything over and above what the Member States themselves can offer.
I thank Parliament, particularly the members of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy and, above all, the rapporteur, Mr Trakatellis, for the great efforts made to ensure that this proposal can be adopted in one reading and in record time.
This is an example of how much can be achieved when all the institutions work well together.
The text being agreed today on the extension of six public health programmes reflects what has been informally agreed between the institutions.
The Commission can therefore accept all the amendments put forward by Mr Trakatellis.
I understand that the Council has also signalled its agreement in principle.
The extension is important for two reasons.
First, it will enable some important public health activities to continue and to fulfil their objectives.
Second, it provides us with the necessary breathing space in which we can take forward the discussions on our proposed new public health programme.
Let me just reassure you about one thing.
The work to be carried out in the extended programmes, and indeed all current health programmes, will be geared towards preparing some of the key actions foreseen by the new programme.
Within the framework of the individual programme decisions, their work programmes will be adapted to these needs.
As far as the text in front of you is concerned, I now hope that once it is voted by Parliament the decision will be adopted by the Health Council on 14 December.
The debate is closed.
The vote will be taken on Wednesday at 11.30 a.m.
Standing of victims in criminal procedure
The next item is the debate on the report (A5-0355/2000) by Mrs Cerdeira Morterero, on behalf of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs, on the initiative of the Portuguese Republic with a view to adopting a Council Framework Decision on the standing of victims in criminal procedure [9650/2000 - C5-0392/00 - 2000/0813 (CNS)].
Mr President, I would like to begin my intervention by welcoming the initiative by the Portuguese Presidency, which has continued - quite rightly, in my opinion - with the French Presidency.
Ladies and gentlemen, as you know, we live in a society in which there are ever-greater cross-border movements.
They are of truly massive proportions and have never been seen before in any era of history.
In this matter, we simply have to remember, for example, that in 1997, within the European Union, more than 200 million people crossed the borders of their State of residence into the territory of other Member States.
The European Union and the creation of the single market in turn involve the creation of an internal area without borders in which the free movement of goods, persons, services and capital must be guaranteed within the territory of the Member States, as laid down in Article 14 of the European Community Treaty.
All of these factors, acting separately, but multiplying their effects when acting together, have meant that every day millions of people quite simply cross the borders of their State of residence into another State of the European Union, whether to live, to work or just to travel.
This fact, whose economic and political consequences will be immeasurable in the medium and long term, nevertheless has certain negative implications for the citizens who make this move.
One of these is the risk of becoming a victim of crime, both inside and outside the territory of their State of residence, ranging from personal robbery to, on occasions, terrorist crimes, which still cause cruel and inhuman damage in certain Member States of the European Union.
Nevertheless, incredibly, the European Union has so far been incapable of creating appropriate formulae for fighting, in a united fashion, this scourge which knows no national borders because in judicial terms, the Member States continue to be shut off behind 15 different national borders.
In the European Union, there is currently the paradox that the abolition of internal borders for the free movement of goods, people, services and capital has to live side by side with the maintenance of 15 national borders in the fields of police and criminal justice, which the Member States are making difficult to remove.
This situation has unjustifiable consequences for those European citizens who move freely within the territory of the European Union.
In the unfortunate circumstance that someone is a victim of a crime in a State other than their usual State of residence, that citizen has to suffer the bad experience of an unacceptable lack of protection, which is due to the inability of the States to build a genuine European judicial area.
All victims of crime, regardless of their place of residence or nationality, must therefore be guaranteed respect for their rights and the certainty that they will receive the same treatment and speedy and sure compensation that all human beings deserve by virtue of the simple fact that they are human beings.
This treatment should be received in any Member State in which a person is a victim of a crime.
It is therefore essential that we create a genuine statute for the victims of crime, a common statute for all the Member States.
The main objective of this initiative is to guarantee a minimum of compensation for victims in all Member States, guaranteeing them at least a common minimum.
By the same token, the fact needs to be pointed out that European criminal legislation in the Member States has always concentrated its attention and efforts on the criminal, both in terms of the prevention of crime and in terms of programmes and measures for rehabilitation directed at criminals.
This is the first initiative that gives special attention and importance to the victim.
This initiative could be called innovative and, up to a point, revolutionary in terms of the way in which victims are treated.
It is, without doubt, a new element in the European judicial system, in which, for the first time, victims have their own recognised judicial status and not, as has been the case until now, one which is derived from the crime.
In many cases, the victim is the object of a crime in the territory of a Member State other than their usual State of residence, which means that their problems and suffering are exacerbated and complicated by a whole range of circumstances which are negative, but common and constant, in the treatment of victims: a lack of communication owing to ignorance of the language, a lack of information, loneliness, a lack of protection in certain areas in which each State has preserved its own legal system.
Therefore, and with the aim of being able to respond adequately to the needs of this type of victim, international standards have also been created which take account of the defence of victims' rights and interests.
I wish to highlight just two aspects of this initiative at the moment: European Convention No 116 of the Council of Europe of 24 November 1983 on the compensation of victims of violent crimes.
I would like to highlight that, despite its importance and the fact that it is a mandatory point of reference in Europe, the Convention has still not been ratified, as of 18 September 2000, by the following Member States of the European Union: Austria, Belgium, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal and Spain.
Another international initiative is the United Nations Declaration of Basic Principles of Justice for Victims of Crime and Abuse of Power adopted by General Assembly Resolution 40/34 on 29 November 1985.
Ladies and gentlemen, because of what I have said previously, and in accordance with the provisions of Article 2(4) of the European Union Treaty, which lays down that one of the objectives of the Union is to maintain and develop the Union as an area of freedom, security and justice in which the free movement of persons is guaranteed, we must ensure that this area of freedom, security and justice guarantees genuine access to justice so that the European public can benefit from suitable legal protection in any part of the Union.
For this reason, the Citizens' Europe will not make sense unless we first adopt, amongst others, the necessary measures to improve and also take account of the rights of victims of crime, aimed in a global sense at safeguarding all their rights and interests, on the one hand, and, from a Community point of view, at harmonising the legislation of the 15 Member States on the other.
Everybody, including the nationals of third countries who have been victims of a crime in any State of the European Union, must receive the same minimum level of treatment.
The European Union cannot accept the idea that people might receive different treatment depending on the State in which they have been a victim of crime or on their nationality.
This discrimination is patently quite unacceptable.
Finally, the initiative is an important step forward in the creation of a European legal area, albeit partial and limited, but it responds to the real needs of an enormous number of European citizens who, until now, have been largely unprotected on becoming victims of crime outside their usual country of residence.
With regard to the positive aspects of this initiative, I would like to highlight the definition of the concept of the victim and the adoption of measures which are intrinsically connected to the global attention which must be paid to them.
For all these reasons, the majority of the amendments which are included in this report have been produced with the aim of respecting and recognising the rights of people who have been victims of crime, and of taking account of their interests and particular circumstances.
To sum up, anyone who has been the victim of a crime must be guaranteed the same minimum level of treatment, their dignity should be protected, they should be guaranteed their rights to give and receive information, they should have access to justice and they should be granted compensation for the damage suffered immediately, effectively and in full.
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market.
(DE) Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, two questions about this proposal played a decisive role in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market.
The first question was to what extent there actually was a legal basis for this proposal.
As rapporteur, I took the view that the undertaking proposed to us here was admittedly a laudable one, but that, unfortunately, it was simply the case that within the European Union and also in relation to the Member States there were relatively clear rules about who had which competences.
As rapporteur, my opinion is that issues relating to organising criminal prosecution and procedural criminal law do not fall within the competence of the Treaty on European Union and that these matters should be dealt with by the Member States.
Unfortunately, the Committee did not go along with my proposal in this specific case, but, as rapporteur, I should nevertheless like to make this opinion known.
The second aspect which played a certain part was the issue of evidence recorded on video.
You may remember the debate on the so-called Di Pietro report, which was held here in this House some time ago.
At the time, this was already a highly controversial matter.
The Committee on Legal Affairs agreed with the rapporteur's view that this recorded evidence was not a suitable instrument in a State under the rule of law and therefore deleted video recordings from the relevant paragraph of the article concerned.
I would ask that this also be taken into account here in further discussions.
Otherwise the proposal is very much to be welcomed.
It would only have been better if it had been dealt with where it belongs, namely in the domain of the national legislator, who could decide all these matters in an exemplary fashion.
Not everything needs to be regulated at European level; if it did an all-embracing competence would have been inserted in the Treaty.
But this was not done.
That is why we should perhaps consider once again whether it is right for us to vote in favour of this initiative.
Mr President, I think it is extremely important that a number of minimum rights are indeed to be safeguarded for victims, in a manner which transcends national boundaries.
That is what this report stands for.
We submitted an opinion to the committee responsible on behalf of the Committee on Women' s Rights and Equal Opportunities.
It was very important in our view for the report to reflect the specific situation of women, but also that of other vulnerable victims.
When I say other vulnerable victims I am thinking, for example, of minors and children, but the list need not end there.
There are other groups in our society that are very vulnerable when it comes to violence.
I have in mind those of a different sexual orientation.
I am also thinking of migrants and so on, who are, of course, particularly vulnerable victims.
What did we request for this group of people?
Firstly, we said that people who are very vulnerable must be given absolute respect.
I am thinking, for example, of the specific situation of women and children who fall victim to sexual violence or physical violence in the home.
It is very important for them that if their case comes to court, this really must be able to take place behind closed doors, so that minimum publicity is given to the victims, who are usually ashamed of the fact that they are victims.
Because of course, that is what it has come to in our society.
I feel, for example, that it is very important for physically abused women to have access to information everywhere on where they can go, where they can find suitable accommodation and stay at a secret address.
It is also essential for the police and the magistrature to receive special training.
I was very actively involved in this issue in my own country, when I was a member of the government.
I noticed how ill-prepared and equipped people in these agencies are - i.e. both the police and the magistrature - when it comes to treating people who are victims of sexual violence, for example, with respect, to questioning them, or providing a separate room for them, for example for women who have been raped and need to be examined.
They should not be cross-examining these people in a room which is a general thoroughfare.
It is absolutely imperative for certain measures to be put in place for this group of people, these specific victims.
The report answers this need.
I am extremely grateful that the Commission has adopted the amendments tabled by the Committee on Women' s Rights and Equal Opportunities and we will therefore support the report.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the report before us today is the result of an initiative by the Portuguese Presidency and is part of a range of measures designed to promote the creation of an area of freedom, security and justice, in order to provide a useful response to the everyday concerns of the European public.
Often, when we address issues of justice, we devote too much time to the penal system, to prisons, to crime-fighting forces, to criminal codes and even to the claims of those in the legal profession.
It may be that we have devoted too little time to the victims, who are often the weakest members of society.
This initiative targets three basic aspects: the victim' s right to information, access to justice and their right to compensation for damages.
The priority of this proposal for a framework decision is to promote the protection and effectiveness of victims' rights in this process, specifically with regard to simplifying access to the law, to the courts and to legal information as well as to promote and protect victims' rights in the field of compensation for loss and damages.
It is crucial that there should be a legal instrument that enables national legislation in the various Member States on the victim' s status to be harmonised.
There are certainly various aspects which need to be improved and even put right, but what is important is that we vote for this framework decision, which is quite well-balanced.
Indeed, we cannot talk seriously about a Citizens' Europe unless we take account of victims' rights.
Amongst these victims, special attention should be paid, as Mrs Smet has already pointed out, to certain categories of victims, such as minors, foreigners, victims of sexual attacks and victims of terrorist acts.
At the same time, special training should be provided for the professionals whose task it is to come into direct contact with victims.
The necessary measures to ensure that the victims can re-establish their normal lives should also be provided, not only in financial terms, but also so that they may benefit, should it prove necessary, from legal, psychological or medical assistance or help from the social services.
Finally, I wish to congratulate the rapporteur, Mrs Cerdeira Morterero, on her work and on the numerous improvements that she implemented in the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs.
I also wish to express my satisfaction at the improvements resulting from the reports by Mrs Smet and Mr Lehne.
We were able to work together in the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs and I wish to emphasise this fact and express my gratitude for it.
I only wish it had been possible to achieve the same consensus in Parliament.
The few proposals for amendments that we tabled mainly concern issues of legal rigour and our understanding that victim support services do not have to be exclusively or even preferably run by the public sector.
Often, in services that wish to have a human face, the best experiences are provided by institutions of social solidarity and other non-governmental organisations.
Overall, the PPE-DE welcomes Mrs Cerdeira Morterero' s report, for which we have already voted in committee.
Mr President, I too would like to stress the importance of the Portuguese legislative initiative contained in Mrs Cerdeira Morterero' s report, which has been put before Parliament.
It is important for a number of reasons: firstly, because we are making headway in the construction of the area of freedom, security and justice, in accordance with the Tampere programme, a programme which is difficult to put into practice because of the clash with the numerous State regulations and the nations' reluctance.
Secondly, it is important because this vote has filled a gap, a gap which means there is unacceptable prejudice against European citizens, who travel freely through Union territory but, when they become victims of a crime, come up against the barriers of different legal systems, difficult to penetrate from every viewpoint, which penalise them further while favouring the offenders.
Finally, this vote is important because Parliament has the opportunity to make significant improvements to the legislative proposal, precisely those suggested in Mrs Cerdeira Morterero' s excellent report and supported by the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms and Rights, Justice and Home Affairs.
However, the most significant aspect, in my opinion, is that people are finally becoming aware, at Union and other levels, of the need to change opinion on State intervention with regard to crimes.
Until now, on the basis of the just principle according to which citizens should be prevented from administering justice themselves, we have restricted ourselves to giving the State the monopoly on punishing the guilty, but we have forgotten that this is not the only task of the State: wherever in the world victims call for justice, we all know what they are asking for, even when the legal systems are completely different: they are calling for amends for a wrong which would otherwise be unacceptable, and the State, which has the task of ensuring citizens' safety, when it is has not been able to protect them, must give all the help possible to victims, thus also showing that the Community takes the side of the party who has suffered the wrong and that the Community therefore condemns the offence and the offender.
By adopting this report, the European Union is giving an initial response to a call for justice which has hitherto been disregarded.
Mr President, I would like to welcome the Portuguese initiative and Mrs Cerdeira's first-class report and thank her for her open and consensual approach.
The Liberal Group feels that a very good report has emerged from the debate in committee and we will be supporting the committee amendments when we vote.
We will not be supporting subsequent amendments from either the European People's Party or the Party of European Socialists, with the exception of Amendment No 59.
We feel that to call on Member States to sign the European Convention of 24 November 1983 on the compensation of victims of violent crime fits better in the legislative resolution than in the body of the report on the framework decision.
It is quite clear that if we are to create and to realise the area of freedom, security and justice provided for at Tampere then we will need legal aid in cross-border cases.
I know from my own constituency of a lorry driver who was assaulted by his employers in the Netherlands and found himself unable to take them to court to gain access to justice.
Therefore, Amendment No 4 is essential.
We know, too, that we need the assumption that a victim of any nationality will be treated in the same way as a victim of the nationality of the country in which the offence takes place.
I have a constituent whose car was broken into in Brussels and who found that the Belgian police wanted to know nothing about it.
This is why we will be supporting Amendment No 14.
We clearly need civil liberties safeguards and the recognition of the special needs of minorities and these are covered by Amendment No 25 and others.
I had in my own constituency a Swedish family attacked; it was a xenophobically-motivated attack, their attackers believed them to be German.
I would be very interested to know whether they found it as easy to gain access to justice in Great Britain as they would have done in their own country.
Somehow, I doubt it.
So, Mr President, Liberals support this report.
We feel it is a major step towards the creation of a European legal area and will benefit millions of our citizens.
Mr President, first and foremost I would like to congratulate Mrs Cerdeira on her speech and her report.
Victims must not be victims twice over, first of crime, and subsequently of the system.
The victim' s most important right in the course of legal proceedings is therefore the right to be heard during the session.
This is also of fundamental importance.
It is quoted in many international documents on victims of crimes and it is essential for the victim to be given access to their own lawsuit.
It is also in the interests of the victim for the case to be brought to a swift conclusion, since slow proceedings can lead to the person feeling an ever worse sense of victimisation a second time round.
Also, victims of sex crimes should no longer be forced to repeatedly give evidence.
I also think video links could prove very useful when dealing with children who have been the victim of sexual abuse.
So the debate on this issue is set to continue.
It is extremely important for specialised assistance to be provided, as Mrs Smet indicated, irrespective of the nature of the crime.
It is important, in this context, for a number of prejudices surrounding this issue to be dispelled; for example the amount of importance attached to certain forms of crime varies from country to country.
In addition, it has been ascertained that when victims report crimes they are subjected to discriminatory behaviour.
Member States should be compelled to set up special police units for victims of crime.
What we also need is a legal basis and harmonisation of measures for the protection of victims.
The study carried out by An Weghers within the framework of the Grotius programme provides the necessary basic information to this end.
The useful information available in certain Member States concerning existing measures could play an important part in the harmonisation of a common package of measures.
An initiative of this kind would also be a first step in the direction of crime prevention.
But in view of the fact that organised cross-border crime is on the increase, the initiative would have to lead to a common prevention programme at European and international level.
Until such time as a harmonised instrument for cross-border protection of victims is in place, it is incumbent on the Member States and the candidate countries, in cooperation with the NGOs, to improve the level of protection for victims, and where appropriate, examine under what conditions the victim is entitled to support for their return to their country of origin, or temporary right of residence, in the way that Belgium accords a status to victims of trafficking in human beings, for example.
Compensation for the victim must take precedence over the payment of the fine and legal costs to the State.
The Member States must ensure that the mediators come from all walks of life, men as well as women, and that they have a thorough understanding of the local culture and communities.
It is also important in this context, for the next of kin, i.e. the family of the victim, to be apprised of the facts in a discreet and professional manner, should they so wish, and for them to be able to rely on receiving the necessary support and not have to learn everything from the press.
Mr President, I support the extremely urgent Portuguese initiative promoting the legal protection of victims during criminal proceedings.
The rapporteur - whom I congratulate - did well to highlight the unacceptable paradox of, on the one hand, a Europe without borders where goods and people move freely, a Europe which is on the point of monetary union, a financial and economic union, and, on the other hand, a Europe of 15 criminal law systems, all completely different.
On the one hand, there are a potential 350 million people who are encouraged to travel and work in the name of the united Europe, but if they fall victim to a crime, a wrong-doing, Europe vanishes, the much-lauded European citizenship vanishes, the citizen becomes a person without rights who has to reckon with a foreign, often hostile State which gives out no information, creates a multitude of problems and does not pay damages where they are due.
How many of us Members of Parliament are requested to ask questions on cases of this kind?
However, the Commission duly replies to us that it cannot go into the matter of national legal systems, even when obvious injustices occur.
Just in recent months two cases have been referred to me.
The first is the case of two Italian Alitalia pilots, Alberto Nassetti and Pierpaolo Racchetti, who died in France following an accident, in unexplained circumstances, during a test flight of an aeroplane.
Six years have gone by and, beset by hundreds of problems and prohibitive legal costs, their families are still waiting for justice, they are waiting to know the cause of these deaths and who, if any, the responsible parties are.
The second case involves a Greek student, Mikis Mantakas, killed around 25 years ago in Rome, following a terrorist attack carried out by the Red Brigades.
The guilty party, Arturo Lojacono, was identified and sentenced, but sought refuge abroad.
Italy has repeatedly requested the extradition of this multiple murderer from France, where Mr Lojacono lives freely, so that he can finally serve his time.
Well, we are still waiting for a reply.
So, together with the euro, I also welcome the advent of the statute for the victims of crime, so that a genuine European area of justice can be built.
Mr President, the initiative to strengthen the standing of victims of crime is a real success story.
In the beginning, most people were against it. Now, however, most of us agree, and that, I think, is a good thing.
I welcome the proposal from Portugal for strengthening the standing of victims of crime in criminal procedure also, even though I have every respect for the views relating to legal aspects expressed by Mr Lehne earlier.
People who are subjected to crime while exercising their right to freedom of movement must not have to suffer twice, inasmuch as they are badly treated.
This is the case irrespective of the type of crime committed.
It is a question of strengthening the standing of the victims, but it cannot be done without also talking about crime prevention measures.
The best way of all of helping victims of crime is to ensure that no crime is committed in the first place, and the most important way of preventing crime is probably to disseminate information.
Crime prevention measures must also aim to combat organised crime.
Victims of crime must know their rights and what opportunities they actually have for receiving help.
Most Member States provide some form of initial help for victims.
Sometimes travellers need additional support and perhaps more support than the local population.
It might be a matter of psychological support and help with the language as well as a whole number of other factors.
It can be difficult for a foreign victim to follow the criminal procedures from a distance, and in this case it is clear that special measures are required.
The victim must always have priority.
Since it is not the perpetrator we must give priority to, it is disturbing to see the tendency in a number of Member States to start introducing nolle prosequi simply because the perpetrator meets the victim.
I cannot support this sort of trend.
Crimes must be solved, and if this does not happen it will, in the long term, threaten the democratic system.
Who will then go out and vote if their problems are completely disregarded?
In my country, the number of cases of assault is increasing, and barely 20 per cent of these cases are solved.
This percentage is too low.
Crime is no accident.
A penalty also involves respect for the victim.
We must never stray from the basic principle that individuals must always take responsibility for their own actions, either at the level of the Member State or at EU level.
The State must ultimately take responsibility for its failure to protect the victim.
Therefore, I am pleased that the rapporteur has drawn up this report, which I commend with enthusiasm.
I would like to thank her for helping to strengthen the unified view of victims of crime in the Member States.
Mr President, at a time when progress is being made in the building of a European area without internal borders, it is important, as your rapporteur underlined, not to forget the thousands of people who every year are victims of criminal offences when they travel on the territory of the European Union.
They are often in a difficult situation because they are far away from home and do not know the system or the language of the country in which the offence took place.
The draft framework decision proposed by Portugal and supported by the French Presidency constitutes a first step in taking into account the situation of victims at the level of the European Union.
The Commission welcomes this.
The question of the situation of victims of criminal offences in Europe was first mentioned in the Vienna Action Plan and included in the conclusions of the European Council of Tampere.
Further, it was the subject of a communication from the Commission on 14 July 1999.
Part of the proposals made in this communication to improve the standards and the assumption of responsibility for victims were included in the draft framework decision presented by the Portuguese Presidency and which is submitted to you today.
I acknowledge the work carried out on this text by Mrs Cerdeira Morterero, your rapporteur.
It was the subject of difficult discussions in the Council.
As you noted, the draft framework decision contains three different types of measures: firstly, it enacts minimum rules with regard to the victim's rights; secondly, it enacts specific rules aiming to take into account the individual situation of those people who are victims of an offence in a Member State other than their State of origin and, thirdly, it encourages the States to develop measures for victim support.
One can be particularly pleased with certain provisions, for example the possibility for victims to lodge a complaint at the place of their residence when they are not in a position to do so in the State where the offence took place.
The Commission does not have any objection to the majority of the amendments proposed by the rapporteur.
However, I would like to draw your attention to three points.
Several amendments refer to the official languages of the European Union, foreseeing the right of victims to communicate in one of these languages.
This mechanism does not, however, appear to be appropriate.
It is important to make it possible for the victim to have information in a language they understand.
In certain cases it might not be a language of the European Union.
In other cases, it might be possible to get the information needed in a language of the Union which is not their own.
It is, therefore, more relevant to refer not to a language of the Union but, in a more pragmatic way, to confer on the victim the right to have access to the necessary information in a language that they understand.
This could involve in certain cases putting an interpreter at their disposal.
Secondly, Amendment No 49 stipulates that Member States guarantee to victims who so wish the right to remain in the State where the procedure takes place, where it is necessary for the procedure to run smoothly.
This provision is very interesting. It requires, however, a more detailed study in relation to European legislation as regards asylum and immigration for the natives of third countries to the Union.
That is why this text was withdrawn from the version under discussion in the Council.
The Commission is currently thinking about a specific text on this important subject in order to protect victims as well as - in a number of cases - to facilitate surveys.
Thirdly, the text invites the Member States to create a 'green number' , functioning 24 hours a day in all the official languages of the Union, in order to make it possible for victims to contact the services for victim support.
This is indeed a good idea as it would allow the European citizen who is a victim of a criminal offence, when travelling in the territory of the Union, to feel in concrete terms the added value at European level.
However, on the one hand the framework decision is not the appropriate instrument here and, on the other hand, its implementation involves a consideration that is rather complex.
Does it involve having the same emergency number in all the Member States on the model of the fire service or the police force?
Does it involve having a centre at European level available 24 hours a day to inform of the possibilities of victim support?
Does it involve setting up a service in each Member State?
The Commission wishes to continue the feasibility study for such a project.
It already works to support the networking at European level of the national services for victim support in order to ensure appropriate care of victims, particularly if they do not reside where the offence took place.
The idea of a 'green number' will be examined within this context.
At this stage, it is perhaps preferable to bring about a working relationship with the services for victim support, rather than putting in a text the principle of a 'green number' , which would be likely to have no future.
The draft framework decision on which you come to a decision today constitutes a first step in taking into account the situation of victims at a European level.
As I have just said, in order to go further within the framework of following up its communication of 14 July 1999, the Commission works on the adoption of concrete measures to support victims, in particular through the support envisaged for the European forum for victim services.
In addition, with regard to victims' compensation, the Commission will submit a Green Paper next year.
I am delighted by the favourable response shown by Parliament to this first text on such an important subject, so that the area of freedom, security and justice which we are gradually building may offer our fellow citizens support in situations that are often difficult to live with.
The debate is closed.
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 12.30 p.m.
(The sitting was closed at 8.46 p.m.)
Mr President, a rather serious problem arose this morning when the assistants were suddenly prevented from boarding the coach to bring us here from the Hotel Monopol, despite the fact that this practice has been applied without a hitch for the past 21 years.
I should like to protest because there would have been five members in the coach and the assistants would have been late for work.
It is a stupid regulation because the bus carrying five passengers could have been replaced by two cars, meaning that there would have been two drivers instead of one.
This bureaucracy must have been thought up by our quaestors and we urgently need to abolish it so that members can take their assistants with them to work.
Mr Posselt, we will pass on your arguments to the College of Quaestors so that they can adopt the resolution that they think best and so that it will be known to all Members.
Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting
The Minutes of yesterday' s sitting have been distributed.
Are there any comments?
Mr President, I just wished to point out that I forgot to sign the attendance register yesterday evening.
We will take note of it.
(The Minutes were approved)
Vote on a request for urgent procedure
Mr Varela, chairman of the Committee on Fisheries, has the floor to give his opinion.
Varela Suanzes-Carpegna (PPE-DE), chairman of the Committee on Fisheries. (ES) Mr President, I would like to inform you that the Committee on Fisheries has decided not to accept this request for urgent procedure, as we were not aware of the Commission proposal until 20 November, when we no longer had time to include it on our agenda.
It was therefore not possible for us to deal with it with the urgency that was asked of us.
However, we will do everything we can to ensure that we will be able to debate it here in the next part-session of the new year.
Thank you very much, Mr Varela.
As there are no other speakers, the Commissioner has the floor.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen. the regulation on control measures in the area covered by the Convention on future multilateral cooperation in the north-east Atlantic fisheries stipulates that the provisions governing the application of these control measures only apply for the year 2000.
The Council was unable to agree on a longer regulation at the time and the rules in question therefore expire at the end of this year.
If we delay in amending this regulation, we shall have no legal basis for European Union control ships in the international waters of the north Atlantic after 1 January 2001.
This will undermine the whole control system and the regional fisheries organisations, which will be weakened as a result.
The control system has proven to be a first rate system and we should spare no effort to strengthen and develop it further.
The Commission therefore supports the Council's request for urgent procedure and calls on the members of the European Parliament to support this urgent procedure.
Mr Varela, chairman of the Committee on Fisheries, the committee responsible, has the floor again.
Mr President, I regret very much that the Commission did not take all this into account before and did not inform us in sufficient time so that we could work on it in committee.
However, the international measures mentioned will remain in force because this is an international agreement.
They will not, therefore, be affected by the delay.
Moreover, as I said before, I hope that we will be able to vote on this proposal during the January part-session.
In any case, it is regrettable that they are asking us for an urgent procedure now, at the last minute, because we have had all of 2000 to process this proposal for a regulation.
I think that the institutions, in this case the Commission, should work more responsibly to ensure that proposals reach this House in due time so that a rapporteur can be appointed, the Commission proposal can be examined, amendments can be tabled, they can be debated in committee and they can then come to the plenary, which they have asked us to do in a single plenary sitting, which is impossible.
Having heard the speeches from the Commissioner and the chairman of the Committee on Fisheries, I put the request for urgent procedure to the vote.
(Parliament rejected the request for urgent procedure)
2001 budget
Madam President-in-Office, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, allow me to start by thanking the President-in-Office, who negotiated with us, with Parliament, in a shrewd and tenacious manner, often without the support of her colleagues, by thanking the Commissioner, who never once lost sight of global European interests, both on and off stage, and by thanking all my colleagues who backed me at the most crucial moments, even where they were of a different opinion, and who were supportive and joined forces in order to defend Parliament's position.
My sincere thanks to one and all.
Without such teamwork we could never have arrived at what is now a relatively comfortable, by that I mean perfectly tension-free situation.
There now appear to be no further obstacles to Parliament's passing a resolution on the European Union budget for 2001 on Thursday.
The chairman of the Committee on Budgets tells me that this is the very first time that agreement has been reached between the Council and Parliament at conciliation.
So well done everyone!
There is a proverb which says that money makes an evil master but an excellent servant.
As the elected representatives of the people, we parliamentarians have acted in accordance with this proverb.
We have not harped on about principles.
We have not set budgetary objectives in advance and then tried to tailor our policy to them.
We wanted a proper, economical, logical budget which would allow us to honour our political commitments and really help those who need our help.
So we agreed with the Council during the night of 23 to 24 November on the main points of what is a perfectly reasonable, although by no means brilliant budget.
Whichever way you look at it, it is reasonable not to give up in the fight against unemployment in Europe, which is why we keep insisting on the need for action at every political level - at local, regional, national and at European level.
The European budget will include EUR 450 million to promote employment over the next five years by supporting small and medium-sized enterprises.
If we implement the action lines described in the charter on SMEs and help SMEs to apply new technologies, we shall, I think, have found a way of creating jobs.
The agreed EUR 450 million is more than four times what the Commission proposed in the preliminary draft budget and frontloading EUR 100 million next year should get us off to a flying start.
The Committee on Budgets proposes that plenary remove the reserves set up at first reading. This applies both to the performance reserve under the heading foreign policy and the administrative expenditure reserve.
We have stated time and again that we support the reform of the Commission and that we agree to the 400 new posts, combined with a new early retirement scheme, but only subject to certain conditions.
Some of these conditions have now been met.
The Commission has submitted its analysis of outstanding commitments and its strategy for eliminating abnormal outstanding commitments.
We put the final touches to a joint declaration by the Council and Parliament in a trilogue last Tuesday.
We all agreed that the Commission should draft a report by the middle of next year on progress made in phasing out commitment backlogs, implementing programmes and simplifying project cycles, a report on how comitology is working, on progress made in implementing the reform package and on the performance targets of the main programmes under Category IV, to mention just a few aspects of the joint declaration.
We now expect the Commission to start work at soon as possible.
Apart from a few minor skirmishes started or continued by the Council at second reading, our second reading has been stripped of most of its contentious points, mainly because we have stated that we are prepared to help the Council achieve what it sees as the extremely important objective of reducing the increase in payments to 3.5%.
This will be achieved mainly by removing the Structural Funds reserve set up at first reading and making fewer payments for Community initiatives, which need to be rebudgeted anyway. The Commission's Letter of Amendment no.
2 which, following renewed calculation, has deducted around EUR 900 million from the sum needed for Category I, was also extremely helpful here.
This Letter of Amendment is most welcome and I imagine that Parliament's consent to it is most welcome in the Council, because it also contains an estimated surplus for the current budget of EUR 900 million, which can be entered straight away under revenue for 2001.
What worried us most right through the budget procedure was how to fund our foreign policy.
Our financial perspective for Category IV was clearly way off target since the war in the Balkans.
The Commission therefore suggested revising the figures by EUR 300 million.
The Council fought against this tooth and nail and it was impossible to reason with it on this point, just as it was last year.
For the Council, the financial perspective is a monstrance and must not be changed.
It has made it into its evil master, to continue the proverb which I quoted earlier.
We were therefore forced to do a deal with it on the EUR 200 million flexibility instrument, as if this did not represent a change to the financial perspective.
But at least we now have a further EUR 200 million at our disposal, although we did in fact need another EUR 300 million.
But we can at least fund what we think is the most important task, i.e. the democratisation and reconstruction of the western Balkans, from a total of EUR 839 million, including EUR 240 million for Serbia.
We refused to allow our other foreign policy priorities to be whittled away still further.
We can finance cooperation with the Baltic region and our crisis reaction forces and we have given MEDA EUR 40 million more than the Council provided.
So, as you can see, we have cobbled together a solution for the 2001 budget.
However, this solution is weak on political and budgetary planning, because it takes no account of the fact that money is needed over a period of several years.
I should like to have responded to long-term requirements with proper multiannual planning.
All this means, of course, is that we shall face the same mountain of difficulties during the next budgetary procedure.
I hope that the person who succeeds me as Parliament's general rapporteur and the Belgian Presidency of the Council, which will be taking over in the second half of next year, enjoy their discussions.
I know from my own experience just how difficult it is to keep all the groups in Parliament together.
However, I also know from the discussions that it is far more difficult to formulate a negotiable Council position, obtain a mandate and accommodate pure national chauvinism in a fairly reasonable and tenable overall European decision.
Naturally, that does not only apply to purely budgetary processes, as the Nice Summit so graphically demonstrated yet again.
So we stand once again at the end of a year and ask ourselves how, in Heaven's name, we can make the Council see reason and make a good servant out of an evil master.
Mr President, Madam President-in-Office, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I must, of course, start by joining Mrs Haug in thanking all the officials and members and the Commission services, although the words do stick in my throat somewhat when it comes to the Council.
I have the honour of dealing with the minor budgets: here the procedure is relatively straightforward and we all know who has the final word.
They may treat us shabbily in Nice but to reverse everything Parliament has done, as in the case of the European Court of Justice, knowing full well that we shall correct it all again this week, is just a waste of resources and we could have helped protect the environment by using less paper.
Meeting Parliament half way would not have come amiss here and would have saved us some work, although I have no objection to the work because what I want for the future is an efficient European Court of Justice which can do its job and, more importantly, clear the backlog of translation work.
If the Council had shown itself to be more accommodating, we could have brokered an agreement back in October.
Having been allocated so little time, which is a pity because the budget - and the rapporteurs - deserve more than a derisory two and a half minutes, I must confine myself to just a few comments.
We must consider internally how all the present requirements can be developed into transparent procedures in the area of promotions policy.
I am delighted that not only the Court of Justice and the Court of Auditors but also the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions have already started to review their promotions policy and develop a transparent, merit-based procedure in which individual performance rather than seniority is the deciding criterion.
I think that we are on the right path and, as part of the budgetary authority - in this case as the budgetary authority because the Council does not play the most decisive role here - we shall help to ensure that this continues in the future.
We here in Parliament must also check to see that our budget still meets the criteria of honesty and clarity.
Let me be quite clear here: we have a number of vacant positions here in Parliament, which save us several tens of millions of euros from one year to the next.
We must therefore consider if the whole way in which we draw up our own budget is still correct, which is why our resolutions will call on our own administration - and I hope that the House will come on board here - to submit a full report on the vacant positions in the House, so that we end up with a budget which meets the criteria of honesty and clarity.
I hope that work will progress on a European recruitment agency - or "joint recruitment office" as we call it in our very best German - so that we can jointly overcome the problems which all the institutions - the Council, the Commission, Parliament and the other institutions - will face over coming years, i.e. the problem of staffing over coming years.
I trust that we shall make real progress here.
I have overrun by one minute and it was a pleasure to do so.
Have I now been allowed more time?
If so, I shall gladly give it to the group because I only prepared for two and a half minutes and intended to overrun by one minute.
I have therefore met my personal target.
I should like once again to thank all my colleagues.
As far as the other institutions are concerned, we have worked together to achieve what I think is a good result which cuts across all party, group, country and other divides.
If the Council were prepared to follow suit next year, if it listened to Parliament more readily, it would be even easier to achieve a good result.
Ladies and gentlemen, do not think that my heart has been softened by Mr Ferber' s arguments, but he actually had five minutes to speak and the services had only indicated two and a half minutes.
Sorry, Mr Ferber.
And if you wish to add anything later - because you had one minute left - I will give you the floor.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, following the Nice European Council, where European integration made significant progress, which the President of France will shortly present to you, I am delighted to present you with the second reading of the draft budget of the European Union, as established by the Council on 24 November.
It is a pleasure, but also an honour and an emotional moment for me to be here with you, at the heart of European democracy.
The Council' s second reading was preceded on 23 November by a conciliation meeting between the European Parliament, the Council and the Commission.
The outcome of this long meeting was, I believe, a twofold success. It was a success for Europe because we were able to overcome our initial differences of opinion and a political success because this budget is an expression not only of a compromise, but also - especially - of our priorities.
Indeed, the representatives of the three institutions spared no effort to conclude an overall agreement on the 2001 budget and I wish to take this opportunity to thank, on behalf of the Council, both the members of the parliamentary delegation and Mrs Schreyer.
The Council has therefore proceeded to its second reading of the budget, taking account of the agreements concluded with the delegation from Parliament, with the ever-present desire to vote for a budget that will enable us to fund all of the European Union' s priorities and a budget that matches up to real needs and to our true ability to make use of appropriations.
This budget will also enable us to implement the reform of the common agricultural policy and to carry out the programming of structural actions as defined in 1999, as well as all of the major programmes decided on jointly by Parliament and the Council.
I am thinking specifically here of research, the Trans-European Networks and culture or audiovisual creation, with the MEDIA Plus programme, on which an agreement was concluded on 23 November.
I should now like to focus on the main progress made at the second reading in Council.
The first point of agreement between the Council and Parliament concerns external action, that is, heading 4 of the budget, on which our institutions shared a common goal, which was to release substantial funding for the Balkans region in 2001, given recent developments in Serbia' s political situation, and to do so without passing the costs of this on to the other geographical priorities of the Union' s external action.
The agreement reached on 23 November therefore defines an overall allocation for the Balkans of EUR 839 million, of which EUR 240 million are earmarked for Serbia.
This very considerable amount, which matches the heavy requirements for 2001, will be largely funded by mobilising the flexibility instrument for an amount of EUR 200 million.
Parliament thereby retains considerable room for manoeuvre at second reading to fund all its other geographical priorities and to do so within the ceiling of heading 4, as the Council had hoped.
The second important aspect of the Council' s second reading concerns Letter of Amendment No 2, which enables the Commission' s new provisions in the field of agriculture to be implemented.
The Council has accepted this Letter of Amendment in its entirety and, out of the same concern to act in accordance with the most recent data available, the Council has also accepted the European Parliament' s amendments on rural development expenditure, which demonstrate the progress that has been made in the adoption and implementation of national programmes.
Finally, the Council voted, as had been arranged at the conciliation meeting of 23 November, in favour of additional credits to the value of EUR 60 million, for the funding of screening tests for BSE.
This sum of EUR 60 million is a preliminary, rapid budgetary response to the Council' s decision to extend tests carried out on cattle.
It must therefore be seen as a provisional sum.
The BSE crisis will indeed require other measures, for which a budgetary assessment has not yet been completed and when a system has been more precisely defined, we will, of course, have to take account of its potential impact on the budget and to release the necessary appropriations whilst, as a matter of priority, studying the possibilities of redeploying funds within heading I. Additional funding can then be provided through a supplementary and amending budget within the financial perspective.
I am delighted that our institutions have been able to reach agreement on adopting, at only one reading, all aspects of this Letter of Amendment No 2, which concerns not only agricultural expenditure but also the fisheries agreements and the inclusion of an estimated balance for the 2000 financial year in the preliminary draft budget for 2001.
The third important aspect of this Council second reading concerns the agreement reached on the allocation for the "Spirit of Enterprise" programme, which continues and complements the "Employment initiative" for the years 2001 to 2005.
The Council and the President have agreed on a very substantial allocation of EUR 450 million for this period and on an allocation of EUR 100 million for 2001.
The credit for this result, which is proof of the priority given by the European Union to the development of small and medium-sized businesses and to employment must be given to your rapporteur, Jutta Haug, who is in the Chamber today.
This action is also one of the Council' s political priorities, as expressed at the Luxembourg, Lisbon and Feira Summits.
Lastly, agreement was reached on 23 November on an increase in payment appropriations for the 2001 budget, which is an increase of 3.5% over the 2000 budget.
As you all know, this aim is particularly "dear" to the Council and I wish to emphasise that an increase of 3.5% will require a considerable effort on the part of the Member States, given that this is slightly above the increase in their national budgets.
However, I am, of course, aware that this agreement will also require a considerable effort by Parliament, because it will require you to arbitrate on sometimes sensitive issues in your first reading.
This agreement on the increase in payments has been made possible by the Commission' s proposal to rebudget an amount of EUR 1600 million in commitment appropriations for Community initiative programmes for 2002 and for subsequent years.
This proposal, which is the result of the time limits necessary for the adoption of these programmes, has been accepted by the Council and by Parliament.
It therefore means that payment appropriations requirements for the preliminary draft budget will be reduced by EUR 700 million.
When the Council voted at second reading for a budget increase of 2.5%, it took due account of this new factor.
For its second reading, Parliament therefore has the considerable margin for manoeuvre of around EUR 1 billion to fund its budgetary priorities, whilst remaining within an overall increase of 3.5%.
The Council did not, of course, limit its second reading to the four points that I have just mentioned.
It also accepted several European Parliament amendments in heading 3 on internal policy, particularly in order to take account of developments in legislation.
Furthermore, the Council accepted certain preparatory actions and certain pilot projects within the limits laid down by the Interinstitutional Agreement, having consulted the Commission on their feasibility.
Finally, the list of points of agreement between the Council and Parliament would not be complete if I did not mention two important texts that have been adopted this year.
First of all, a joint declaration on improving the information provided to Parliament and the Council on the Commission' s financial programming, which was adopted in July, on the initiative of Mr Colom i Naval, which I welcome.
Secondly, a joint declaration has just been adopted, quite recently, on the progress report on the reform of the Commission, on the initiative of Mr Elles.
These two declarations improve the transparency of the budgetary procedure and of the reforms currently taking place in the Commission.
I think that they are bound to improve the efficiency of these procedures, which is, I believe, an objective shared by all our institutions.
Personally, I consider this to be extremely important.
More generally, I wish to emphasise that the budgetary procedure that will be completed in a few days has clearly demonstrated the interest in the Interinstitutional Agreement of 6 May 1999.
It is as a result of the consultation between the three institutions, which is provided for and regulated by this agreement, that we have been able to work together on this draft 2001 budget.
Mobilising the flexibility instrument, which is one of the key innovations of the 1999 agreement, has therefore enabled us to conclude an agreement on the funding of the European Union' s external actions in 2001, whilst taking account of factors that may occur along the way.
These additional appropriations will enable us to speed up the European Union' s aid programme for the Western Balkans in 2001.
By the same token, within this Interinstitutional Agreement, the Council has left substantial margins within the ceilings of the financial perspective established in 1999, largely for heading 3 - internal policy - and for heading 4 - external action.
These margins will give the European Parliament the opportunity, at second reading, to set its own priorities within the various Community policies and actions.
Lastly, before you proceed to the final adoption of this budget, I wish to stress the importance the Council attaches to some of the fundamental budgetary rules, in the field of entering appropriations in the reserve, the legal basis and the classification of expenditure.
First of all, the entering of appropriations in the reserve can only be carried out by the budgetary authority if the corresponding legal basis has not yet been adopted, in accordance with the provisions of the financial regulation.
The Council therefore, at second reading, re-established all the appropriations entered into the reserve by Parliament for reasons other than the absence of a legal basis.
In this respect, I welcome the agreement that has been reached at first reading by our two institutions to abolish the conditional entering of appropriations in the reserve, which had been carried out by Parliament, for heading 4, the performance reserve, and for heading 5, with regard to appropriations relating to the reform of the Commission, under Letter of Amendment No 1.
Secondly, I should like to insist on the respect for the rules that is incumbent on the institutions with regard to classifying appropriations as compulsory or non-compulsory expenditure.
Your Committee on Budgets has proposed to change two budget lines by amendment at second reading, one concerning the early retirement scheme and the other expenditure relating to the fisheries agreement.
I wish to draw the European Parliament' s attention to the fact that, under the terms of the Interinstitutional Agreement, these budget lines constitute compulsory expenditure, which was, moreover, acknowledged by Parliament at first reading.
Consequently, appropriations included in these lines must be considered to have been definitively adopted following second reading in Council, in accordance with Article 272 of the Treaty and cannot therefore be further modified.
To conclude this overview, I wish to join those who have highlighted the excellent climate in which this budgetary procedure has taken place.
The discussions were at times frank, but were always relevant and underpinned by ongoing exchanges of views, which enabled us better to understand each other and therefore to more easily conclude an agreement, which I hope everyone will find satisfactory.
A good budget is a budget that has been thoroughly discussed.
This budget should therefore be born under the best auspices.
I wish to personally thank Terence Wynn, chairman of the Committee on Budgets, and the three rapporteurs, Jutta Haug, Markus Ferber and Joan Colom i Naval as well as all the members of the Committee on Budgets that I have had the pleasure of meeting during the six months of the French Presidency.
I can assure you that the Council' s objective, throughout this budgetary procedure, has been to produce a budget for 2001 that will enable the European Union to respond to the crises that affect it within Europe itself but also those occurring beyond its borders.
I think that, together, going beyond the priorities of each of our institutions, we have created, step by step, a budget for the 2001 financial year, which reflects the ambition that we all advocate, of a Europe at the service of its citizens.
You must now give this outcome your approval.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, unlike the negotiations in Nice, a substantial result was achieved on the 2001 budget in a single joint night sitting.
Unlike Nice, all three institutions - the European Parliament, the Council and the Commission - are, I think, well pleased with the final result.
It provides a good basis for Community policy next year; to be honest, the Community approach has been most productive throughout the year, throughout all the preliminary discussions and, on behalf of the Commission, I really must thank you and your colleagues, Mrs Parly; you proved to be a very skilled midwife at the birth of this 2001 budget and focused the debates and negotiations on the core issues.
I should also like to thank the rapporteur, Mrs Haug, for her highly original combination of total determination and willingness to negotiate which culminated in this good result.
I should also like to thank the rapporteurs, Mr Ferber and Mr Colom i Naval, the chairman of the Committee on Budgets, Mr Wynn, and the members of the Committee on Budgets for being so committed. It was thanks to their commitment that negotiations were brought to such a successful conclusion.
The 2001 budget which we now have before us gives us funds of EUR 96.2 billion for new commitments next year and EUR 92.6 billion for payments.
That translates into a rate of increase in the budget, as you pointed out, of 3.1 and 3.5% in comparison with the previous year, roughly in line with the rate of increase in the national budgets.
One very important point is that the total budget only accounts for 1.06% of the joint European gross national product and, in terms of expenditure ratios, is lower than this year's budget.
This illustrates that we have applied budgetary discipline, but it also illustrates that the financial planning concept decided in Berlin, i.e. that expenditure for the current Member States is being cut back in order to find room to fund enlargement, is being taken into account and is working.
However, we must also note that the figures before us today do not include the supplementary budget which still needs to be addressed in the wake of the BSE crisis.
I shall come back to that in a moment.
First: what is so special about the 2001 budget?
In the Commission's view, it is the fact that the second pillar of agricultural policy, namely promoting rural development, shows the highest rate of increase at 10%.
I think this is worth mentioning because it means that we have a total of EUR 4.5 billion at our disposal.
I really must disagree with the chairman of the Committee on Agriculture, who stated recently in a newspaper interview that this amounted to no more than a toothpick, never mind a second pillar, because this fails to do justice to the size of the sum in question: 4.5 billion is a considerable sum of money - it is almost as much as we have for the whole of foreign policy and the size of this sum and this ratio need to be highlighted.
We really can say, in foreign policy, that the policy of the European Union is having a huge effect, even with this budget, and I am positive that it is thanks to Community policy that we now have democratisation in the Balkans and a chance, hopefully, of stability in the near future.
I am positive that no such success would have been possible with the old concept of bilateral friendships, with Member States being played off against each other.
It is the outcome of Community policy and it is therefore excellent that we have again managed to include EUR 839 million in the 2001 budget for the Balkans.
It was no easy task, but we managed thanks to the agreed use of the flexibility reserve, which was used to provide funds over and above the sum provided for or decided in Nice as a basis for the Balkan policy - namely a total of EUR 4.65 billion over the period up to 2006.
In providing the EUR 200 million emergency package, the Union has also proven that it is perfectly able to act quickly and take full account of its foreign policy responsibilities.
What is important is that no country in the Balkans will now be offered less aid than originally planned before developments in Serbia due to the democratisation of Serbia.
I think it is also important to signal that we fully support the new potential for cooperation which has arisen at last.
I should like at this point to take the opportunity to thank Mr Kouchner for his splendid work in Kosovo; we were also able to provide huge support here from our budgetary resources.
The process of reforming the Commission is also extremely important, particularly with a view to good financial management.
Good financial management needs sufficient, well-qualified staff.
Allow me at this point, on behalf of the Commission, to thank the budgetary authority for its support and for approving 400 new posts.
You have linked this with a call for a concerted effort to bring about improvements, especially in areas in which financial support programmes have been implemented late or badly and I can assure you, ladies and gentlemen - especially you Mr Elles - that the Commission will do everything it can to improve its past record on the implementation of financial programmes.
But let us not delude ourselves: we need both good financial management and the corresponding means of payment if we are to eliminate outstanding commitments.
Nearly a third of the budget is set aside for structural policy, in order to help regions in economic difficulty overcome their problems and make up economic ground, especially through the Cohesion Fund.
The Court of Auditors recently confirmed in a special report that this objective is being achieved and that the money from the Cohesion Fund is being put to good use.
Here the Community is demonstrating solidarity by using Community funds to provide real support for economic development and it goes without saying that the regions and countries which are now on the receiving end of our solidarity will be prepared in the future to demonstrate their solidarity with the new countries, as and when we enlarge the European Union.
Ladies and gentlemen, with the new outbreak of BSE in cattle, immediate action was also required in the budgetary area in order to protect health and consumers and help the farmers affected.
The budget being voted on today includes EUR 6 billion to subsidise beef production, in addition to the EUR 60 million budgeted in order to cofinance BSE tests.
The agricultural ministers meeting in emergency session have proposed new measures in the wake of the BSE crisis, but we are all agreed that it makes no sense to postpone the resolution on the budget in order to include these new measures and that a supplementary budget will be submitted post haste in order to fund the necessary measures.
A considerable amount of money will be needed, which is why I think that the Ecofin Council needs to address the budgetary consequences as a matter of urgency, because there are still points at which there is a discrepancy between our claims, or what we have in mind, and the funds at our disposal.
Plus - and this was again stressed in Nice - we have to comply with the financial regulations and ceilings for the agricultural budget.
Here we are in the peculiar situation of having even less room for manoeuvre because of the change in exchange rates.
I was therefore most annoyed when the agricultural ministers, whilst fully aware of the BSE situation, rushed and served themselves from Christmas tables piled high with fruit and vegetables, bananas and nuts which required a total of 85 million in increased subsidies.
I think that when a new emergency arises - and with the BSE crisis new priorities obviously need to be set in the agricultural budget - then certain consequences also apply and clear resolutions need to be taken and the core issues defined for the agricultural budget, which does, after all, total EUR 44 billion.
As the Commissioner responsible for the budget, I am completely behind the emergency action which needs to be decided, including support for the beef market, but the fact that we subsidise beef production to the tune of EUR 6 billion on the one hand and must now pay out thousands of millions to subsidise its destruction is proof positive, in my opinion, of the urgent need for action in the whole agricultural policy sector.
I trust that the European Parliament will support me here.
Several decisions taken at Nice are highly relevant to the budget and the budgetary process.
All the institutions will have their work cut out here.
All the more reason to rejoice in the fact that negotiations on the 2001 budget were conducted in such a good atmosphere and led to such good results and, on behalf of the Commission, I should like thank everyone involved.
Mr President, as the rapporteur I thank both the President-in-Office of the Council and the Commissioner for their kind words, but I did ask a concise question in my previous turn.
It was asking for someone to explain to us rationally, if not in a Cartesian manner, the difference between an annual revision of the financial perspective and the use of the flexibility instrument.
I would like to have an explanation.
If not, I will have to interpret that silence is the response.
Mr President, I should like to answer Mr Colom i Naval on the issue of the use of the flexibility instrument in revising the financial perspective.
In fact, the repeated use, two years in a row, of the flexibility instrument could be considered, wrongly in my opinion, to be a form of revision of the financial perspective.
Personally, I think that this is not true in terms of procedure and certainly not in terms of substance.
The procedure for the flexibility instrument was laid down in the Interinstitutional Agreement for the purpose, in exceptional cases, of funding specific expenditure over and above the ceilings agreed in Berlin, without calling the financial perspective into question.
I therefore think that, with regard to content, there is no contradiction between the two approaches, but rather a form of complementarity.
With regard to the specific cases that we have experienced for the last two years, in other words, Kosovo and Serbia, mobilising the flexibility instrument has enabled us to fund exceptional expenditure through an exceptional effort.
In both of these cases, the flexibility instrument has enabled us to anticipate needs.
In Kosovo, for example, there was a need to implement aid more quickly whereas in Serbia, the need was to commit a significant sum, even before a definitive assessment of needs was carried out and even before the distribution of roles between the various donors could be defined.
From the Council' s point of view, therefore, mobilising the flexibility instrument does not represent a challenge to the viability of the financial perspective laid down in Berlin.
Furthermore, the Council has defined a multiannual sum, admittedly indicative in nature, which is compatible with this financial perspective, for the framework programme for aid for reconstruction in the Western Balkans.
I hope that I have answered Mr Colom i Naval' s question.
After this illustration, which I am sure will be very useful to all Members, we are going to do the round of the opinions of the various parliamentary committees.
Mr President, I wish to begin by thanking Mrs Haug for her hard work and her success in relation to small and medium-sized enterprises.
That has been a high-order issue for the Committee on Industry, and we are very pleased with the success that she has achieved.
However, it is not just a success for the Committee on Industry and for Parliament; it also reflects the priorities of governments in Europe.
That is the point that causes me some consternation in relation to the position adopted in this process by the Council.
My committee is very interested in the research area.
We praised Commissioner Busquin, who has exceeded our expectations in that area.
We have heard the Council say on many occasions that it wants to ensure that Europe becomes pre-eminent in research.
Then we see the Council make a significant cut in payment appropriations, so that Mrs Haug then has to make some changes.
We have heard from the Council today that it is prepared to improve the record by 3.5%.
That is the context of the process we are engaged in.
I congratulate our rapporteur. However, our committee is somewhat disappointed by the approach of the Council.
Mr President, I would like to thank the rapporteur, Mrs Haug, for the outstanding cooperation, and also the chairman of the Committee on Budgets, Mr Wynn.
I have two comments to make in connection with the document now on the table, and these are directed at the Council and the Commission.
To start with, I want to talk about the overall agricultural budget.
Of course we know that it comprises almost 45% of the EU budget, but if you add up what the EU Member States contribute and what the European Union contributes to the agricultural budget, you arrive at 1.9%, and a substantial amount of that is spent on the development of rural areas and environmental development.
That is a mere pittance compared with what other trade blocks in the world spend.
If you consider that American companies receive the equivalent of three times as much aid and a capricious country such as Turkey spends in excess of 10% of government money on agriculture and horticulture, then it is Europe that wants something for nothing.
My second point concerns BSE.
I think you should know that on the night of 23 and 24 November, when we sat round the table with Mrs Parly, we fought like lions to get more money for BSE.
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development told us to use the financial leeway between the financial perspective and the final budget, which amounted to upwards of generous EUR 900 million at the time, EUR 600 million of which was to be used for BSE.
We fought tooth and nail to add a few extra million euro.
A week further down the line and two cases of BSE have come to light in Germany.
This means that in actual fact we already need a supplementary budget of EUR 900 million.
This would suggest that the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development in this House was keenly aware of what needed to be done and was also fiercely critical of the Council and the Commission in this respect, for their handling of BSE policy.
Swifter decision-making based on tests as opposed to draconian measures after the event would have cost considerably less and it would be too stupid for words, regarding this political policy, also on the part of the Council and the Commission, to say that from now on we will include the bill in the agricultural budget.
That is impossible because we have an agreement with the Council and the Commission for the remainder of the agricultural budget, for all the necessary allocations, and that means supplementary budgets. It also means that this extra money must come from the Member States, and not be plundered from the existing agricultural budget, because - and I am addressing this comment to both the Council and the Commission - I assume you have given your word on this, regarding the agreement we reached.
Mr President, I too would like to thank Mrs Haug for her excellent work in preparing the budget.
Mrs Haug and the Committee on Budgets have taken account of the proposals by the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism.
Our committee' s main objective was to see that there were sufficient payment appropriations in next year' s budget.
In this way, we ensure that problems with last year' s arrears are resolved and new programmes are introduced effectively.
If necessary, the matter of payment appropriations must be examined in the supplementary budget in 2001.
The amendments to cross-border cooperation are justified, but we were slightly off target with regard to Interreg and URBAN.
The focus for transport is the development of the trans-European transport networks.
I am grateful for the investment in sustainable transport, but it has to be said that transport and tourism appropriations are little more than token gestures.
In the years to come we will need considerably more in these areas.
Our committee will be monitoring the implementation of the budget.
The effective use of resources will serve to improve the employment situation, particularly via SMEs and new technology.
Mr President, as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Development and Cooperation, I would like first of all to say that the European Parliament has scored a major victory in as much as the cuts in the Latin American, Asian and African poverty programmes have been made good.
I would particularly like to extend warm thanks to the Commission and the Council for this.
Latin America, Asia, Africa and the Balkans should be regarded as pillars of equal standing in our external policy and not played off against each other.
This must shortly find expression - as is clear from the debate - in the multiannual programme.
Secondly, it gives me great pleasure to note that there is support from the whole of Parliament, right across the political spectrum, for the concrete objectives for tackling poverty, as have been proposed by the Committee on Development and Cooperation in the 2001 budget, partly on the basis of the historical data provided by the European Commission; in particular, the doubling of the budgets for basic education and healthcare in the regional programmes for Latin America, Asia, Africa and the European Development Fund, amounting to a total of around EUR five million, is a huge step forwards.
Output instead of input.
We are counting on robust instructions and spending from the European Commission, in line with these objectives.
I would like to thank Mrs Haug most sincerely.
Mr President, I would also like to thank the rapporteur, Mrs Haug, for the magnificent work that she has done as the rapporteur responsible for the budget and for her efforts in dealing with the requests that the various committees have made.
As far as the Committee on Women' s Rights and Equal Opportunities is concerned, the final result is not exactly the one that we would have liked.
The quantities budgeted are very far below what we had requested, but we accept that this has been a general practice and we therefore accept the result as it stands.
This does not mean that in next year' s budget we will not once again be determined to obtain what we think is fairest and most appropriate, and what will enable us to achieve the objectives of the Committee on Women' s Rights and Equal Opportunities.
Mr President, first of all I support the overall budget.
It operates within the financial perspective.
We have no more important obligation than to live within our means.
I speak on what is probably the smallest line in the budget: EUR 2.9 million for the Ombudsman.
That is a very small sum of money.
It constitutes less than one cent per inhabitant of the European Union.
Let us regard it as the "citizen's cent".
We have to make sure that we listen to the citizens and if they have complaints, that there are procedures to redress them.
That expenditure is well-spent.
The Committee on Petitions very much hopes that its budget will now provide for a proper database so that citizens who are interested in pursuing their petitions will be able to see what progress is being made.
We hope that will be achieved.
Finally, information is an important concern for this Parliament.
We must see that we keep our information programmes.
In particular I would cite Euronews so that people can see in the media what Parliament and the Union are doing.
Mr President, I would also like to thank Mrs Haug for her excellent work.
I fully agree with the comments made by our colleague Joan Colom on the revision of the financial perspective.
The amount for the common fisheries policy is scarcely 1% of the Community budget.
However, this small quantity, which is essential for maintaining the activity of the sector and the economies of areas that are dependent on fisheries, is a very appetising snack, despite being small, each time we look at where to find money to fund new policies.
Commissioner, fish is an essential element for a healthy, balanced diet that is rich in proteins.
When European consumers go to the market with concerns about what they can buy, in fish they find a safe, quality product.
They will therefore think that this 1% of the European Union budget is being very well used.
The 2001 budget gave rise to a fair amount of indignation among the members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, the main reason being that 50% of the PRINCE information campaign was entered in the reserve.
This decision would have prevented us from running the information campaign on the introduction of the euro in the year which matters, i.e. in 2001, at a time when uncertainty due to the fall in the value of the euro against the dollar and the need for information on the introduction of coins in 2002 are at their height.
The Committee on Budgets decided during the last few days to propose to Parliament that the 50% be removed from the reserve and allocated to these lines.
Our warmest thanks therefore to the members of the Committee on Budgets.
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs is satisfied and the Commission has the necessary planning security.
Mr President, no great drama has been acted out around the debate on the budget this year.
That does not mean, however, that things have been easy.
The matter-of-fact approach of the rapporteur, Mrs Haug, has nevertheless shown its strength.
The Chairman of the Committee, Mr Wynn, also deserves our thanks.
It is a positive step, as far as culture is concerned, that the financing of multiannual programmes, i.e. Socrates, Culture 2000, Youth and the new Media Plus programme, are in order with regard to the budget.
Hopefully, the problems that occurred in the implementation of the programmes are over.
It is important that the Union should serve the needs of its citizens well.
In the budget there is direct financing for European culture networks.
There is no doubt at all that they need it. But the rules for financing are not yet working properly.
There is too much that is arbitrary about all this.
The Committee on Culture, Youth, Education, the Media and Sport intends to look into this matter early next year.
The modest sums involved must be spent well and fairly.
Mr President, I speak for the European People's Party and European Democrats.
I would like, in introducing our group's position on this, to welcome the work done by Mrs Haug and by our own rapporteur, Mr Ferber, to thank the Commissioner, Mrs Schreyer, and also the Council President, Mrs Parly, for their significant assistance in achieving a budget on 23 November which, as the presidency has rightly pointed out, was a landmark in the way in which Parliament, the Council and the Commission have been able to help decide collectively a budget for the European Union.
We have a budget which is under 1.06%, we have a budget, Mr Colom, which is within the financial perspective.
I suspect that, to put it simply, flexibility is for small amounts and revision is for large amounts, but we will see in the next few years how that will go.
But I would like to thank both the Commission and the Presidency-in-Office of the Council for their remarks about the joint declaration which we have put together, because that is also a first indication of how we are going to monitor improvements and performance in the running of the programmes, particularly in category 4.
Turning to that for a moment, we have a lot of work in front of us and we await with interest the report by Mrs Schreyer, preferably before 30 June, so that we can use its contents for shaping up the 2002 budget.
But in thinking about the question of the backlog on commitments and how we limit the duration of new commitments - obviously this comes into the domain of the financial regulation which we will have to negotiate.
We believe it is absolutely fundamental that this progress report should be seen to restore the confidence of our citizens in the way in which the European Union institutions operate.
A word on the reserve, Madam President-in-Office of the Council.
You said, if I understood you correctly, that we should not be using the reserve because it was against the rules to do this.
We use the reserve, particularly on first reading, to draw attention to particular points of weakness in the way in which policies are operating.
The information policy in the institutions at the moment is a scandal and therefore, rather than putting money on the line for information policy when we know it is not being used effectively, we are going to be keeping much of that money in reserve waiting for the Commission to come up with the right proposals.
Of course, the solution would be to allow us, as a joint budgetary authority, to lift funds being spent during the year and that may be an invention which we can insert into the revision of the financial regulation.
Lastly, I would say, looking to the future, that Nice has shown us that there is perhaps a feeling that we are shifting a little bit towards intergovernmentalism, with the Council deciding on the numbers of our Parliament without our being consulted beforehand.
Our confidence as one of three institutions, will only be maintained - and therefore the institutional agreement and the financial perspective maintained - if we manage to create mutual confidence and if we are consulted at every stage on our fundamental interests.
Mr President, my thanks first and foremost to Florence Parly, who is just leaving but who, I think, is still within earshot.
After the experiences of last year, I think she has created a very good atmosphere, both here and in the Council, with the active commitment which she has shown throughout her presidency.
I should also like to thank Mrs Schreyer, who has continued to help us with her highly constructive approach and, of course, my friend Jutta Haug, who has done an excellent job, not forgetting Joan Colom i Naval and Markus Ferber.
We are now at the point at which we must decide whether or not we can vote in favour of this budget next Thursday.
Obviously we need to take a very close look at it and this is exactly what Parliament in general and we Social Democrats in particular intend to do.
We believe that we managed to do a great deal of good during the discussions, both retaining and extending crucial priorities.
With unemployment still at over 8% throughout Europe, the European Union needs to use the budget at its disposal to send out a clear message and to set about fighting this scourge in the economy to our citizens, which is why it is important that we have this 450 million at our disposal next year, starting with 100 million this year.
It shows people that we take their problems seriously and are doing something about them.
I am delighted that we have managed in Category IV of this budget to show those living in the greatest need or in the process of democratising their countries throughout the world that this European Parliament and this European Union has not forgotten them, even if we have our own problems to resolve, and that here too we are making sure that there is enough money to go round.
It is important for the people in the Balkans to understand, following the long period of hostilities during which our side presented a united front, that they can also rely on us when it comes to reconstruction.
There are people sitting in this House who are at pains to ensure that the money needed will in fact be provided as and when it is needed and that flowery words will be accompanied by specific actions.
So I think that, along with much else which there is too little time to mention, we have a great deal to be pleased about.
We have also passed a number of resolutions containing instructions.
Allow me to say to the Commission, by way of example, that we have agreed to the 400 additional posts because we want to improve how various programmes are implemented, because we want you to be able to work better than you have been able to do in the past.
But we also say in no uncertain terms that this implies a responsibility and a commitment on your part, because we shall be watching over you throughout this process.
We shall be checking up, we shall be in contact with you and we shall be keeping tabs on what is happening, ensuring that there really has been an improvement before we are prepared to go even further with you.
It is also a commitment vis-à-vis the Council.
I have a couple of questions to put to the Council - not that I am questioning the compromise.
But should we really have to try year after year to see what is left over from the previous year, what can be carried over to provide enough money for regions such as Serbia and the Balkans?
Should we really have to check first and see what is left over?
Is our message to these people: we will give you what is left over and then we shall see if we can add anything to it?
Should that be our message? No it should not!
By refusing to discuss the specific long-term aspects of this challenge with us, you have brought the whole spirit of the Interinstitutional Agreement into question.
You keep saying that the financial perspective is sacrosanct as far as you are concerned.
But the Interinstitutional Agreement between the three institutions is also a valuable item and should help us to achieve joint planning security.
The Balkans and other regions need planning security.
Repeated use of the flexibility instrument also contradicts the Interinstitutional Agreement, because it was an instrument which this European Parliament secured in order to pay for contingencies and so that it could let it run up to EUR 600 million.
It was never meant to be used for firefighting every year in areas which we have to fund in any case.
You are undermining the Interinstitutional Agreement and let me assure you that we shall consider whether or not we intend to have a part in this next year.
Mr President, firstly I would like to thank the budget rapporteurs, Mrs Haug and Mr Ferber, for their excellent work.
The same goes for Mr Wynn, the Chairman of the Committee on Budgets, for the splendidly accomplished conciliatory work he has done and for his constructive leadership of the committee.
Next year' s budget will be very much based on strict budgetary discipline.
Although agricultural expenditure, which accounts for almost half the entire budget, will increase by more than 5%, when the Letter of Amendment has been taken into account, the overall increase in the budget is just 3.5%.
This means that great restraint has been shown in the use of funds in the other categories.
This makes just 1.056% of GNP, which must be considered very low as the ceiling for the financial perspective is 1.11%.
This means a saving of more than EUR 2 billion.
This, however, conceals a danger.
The budget will be seeing a structural distortion, as money spent on payment commitments comes to over EUR 3.6 billion more than that for appropriations for payments.
This means that there will be an increase in arrears.
For that reason, Parliament' s concern that the problem of arrears will have to be dealt with is a justified one, and that is why there has been a very real need for a joint declaration by Parliament and the Council.
Furthermore, the fact that the Council and Parliament reached agreement regarding the EU' s budget for next year is to be greeted with satisfaction.
It shows that both budgetary authorities are taking responsibility for the administration of the EU in an appropriate manner.
However, it is unfortunate that Parliament once again had to fight with regard to funds for the West Balkans.
Regarding other matters, I would say that for my group it is a positive move that a 450 million euro multiannual programme was agreed for the employment initiative; and, moreover, that it was agreed that funds remaining unspent from Community initiatives - totalling EUR 1 600 million- would be budgeted in the years to come.
We failed to fill a considerable number of parliamentary posts throughout this year.
This shows that in future there must be better use of personnel resources.
With these observations, my group is prepared to adopt the draft budget.
Mr President, I too wish to thank the rapporteur and, of course, the Commissioner and the President-in-Office for their excellent work.
Our group will also vote in favour of this budget because it shows that, once again, we have reached an exemplary compromise, despite being under increasing pressure.
The main sources of this pressure are unemployment, the BSE crisis and the Balkan stability pact.
We have resolved and reached satisfactory compromises on all these urgent problems - and never once to the detriment of the interests of the EU.
We wanted to secure the EU's ability to act and the confidence of the people.
Nonetheless, I should like expressly to agree with Mr Colom i Naval, who said earlier that the financial perspective has become more and more of a straightjacket, preventing any real planning, any real long-term planning.
Constant use of the flexibility reserve is undermining the transparency of the budget and in time this too will lead to a loss of credibility.
Even the Notenboom procedure, whereby funds are transferred to critical regions, in this case to fund the Balkan stability pact, does not really guarantee a transparent budgetary procedure.
It already looks likely that the huge risk of a clash between MEDA, Mediterranean rim projects and the Balkans will increase over the next few years, despite the fact that we all know that this is where money is urgently needed.
On the other hand, we are also aware that the Council is perfectly capable of suddenly questioning the financial perspective when it comes to BSE, when it comes to national interests.
I found Mr Chirac's statement at the Nice Council extremely interesting.
I think the Council urgently needs to consider how it, for its part, intends to handle the financial perspective.
In all events, Parliament will be a much tougher negotiating partner next year.
Ladies and gentlemen, we are suspending the debate at this point in order to hear the President of the Republic of France and of the European Council.
The debate will resume when appropriate according to the agenda.
European Council/ French Presidency
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen of the European Parliament, I am delighted to be with you here today to present an assessment of the French Presidency of the Union and also to consider the progress that has been made over the last few months.
You are all familiar with our aims. I discussed them in this Chamber on 4 July.
I think that we have been able to fulfil our commitments, although you will be the judges of that.
I am also aware that this outcome certainly owes a great deal to the contribution made by the European Parliament.
I have just returned from Nice after four days of intense negotiations, led by my Prime Minister and the members of his government.
Today I join you, the representatives of the European peoples, to tell you the results of the Intergovernmental Conference on institutional reform.
The stakes were high and we feel satisfied that we reached an agreement that would have been impossible three years ago.
We feel satisfied that we overcame the difficulties blocking the path towards the much sought-after aim of fulfilling the commitments that were given at Helsinki to the candidate countries without destroying the Union, of enabling tomorrow' s Europe to continue to function effectively.
I think I can say that we met these conditions.
I am quite aware that the Treaty of Nice does not fulfil all of the European Parliament' s desires, but I do believe that this treaty is the best agreement possible, given the existing constraints.
It responds to the challenge we were presented with, which was to provide the Union with the ability to take decisions and to act once Europe has gone ahead with enlargement on an unprecedented scale.
It is a balanced agreement and although the negotiations were tough, as you know, there were neither winners nor losers.
In Amsterdam, three and a half years ago, it proved impossible to achieve the tricky balance between being representative and being effective.
We were able to achieve this at Nice, as a result of the efforts made by all the Member States.
It must be said that some agreed to make more of an effort than others and we must pay tribute to them for that.
We must also pay tribute to the European spirit, which finally enabled us to leave Nice having resolved those issues left over from Amsterdam and having paved the way for the future.
As we promised, there are no leftovers from Nice.
We were concerned that the Commission should remain a strong institution within the Union, capable of making ambitious proposals.
In deciding to abolish a second Commissioner, and in deciding on a varying upper limit for the number of Commissioners when there are less than 27, with a scrupulously fair system of rotation, the Treaty of Nice guarantees both the Commission' s task of embodying the interests of the Union and also its effectiveness.
This effectiveness will also be achieved by means of the new powers that have been given to the President, who will now be elected by qualified majority, which constitutes real progress.
I know that Parliament considered the number of areas in which qualified majority voting will apply to be one of the priorities of these negotiations.
This also proved to be one of the thorniest issues, but progress was made.
I am talking about real progress, even if it does not go as far as the presidency - which, I should point out, has shown great openness at national level - would have wished.
When you consider the results of the Nice Summit, I would ask you not to underestimate what has been achieved.
Thirty or so additional measures were switched to qualified majority voting and we made progress on justice and home affairs, external trade and cohesion, all chapters about which several Member States had major reservations at the beginning of the negotiations.
The presidency regretted the fact that the same consensus could not be achieved in the fields of taxation and social affairs.
The agreement reached on the issue of the number of Member States' votes within the Council is a balanced one.
Reweighting was made necessary by enlargement, but it also takes account of the legitimate concern to see Member States with a smaller population continuing to make their full contribution to the workings of the Union, a contribution that is crucial.
I would add that the democratic legitimacy of the Council' s decisions will be guaranteed and that the Council will be able to function properly.
The mechanisms that are implemented, be they the demographic verification clause or the so-called "majority of States" clause, will not affect the Union' s decision-making abilities.
I now come to one of the most positive outcomes of the IGC.
This concerns the procedure for enhanced cooperation, which has, to a large extent, been made possible under the first and third pillars.
This cooperation will always be open to everyone.
It will, of course, take place in full respect of Community legislation and the institutional framework.
By making this cooperation more flexible, however, we are enabling it to be used properly.
This therefore provides us with a guarantee that Europe will be able, no matter what happens, to forge ahead rapidly.
The opening up of enhanced cooperation under the second pillar is also a step forward.
I would also highlight the fact that this IGC resulted in an extension of the powers and competences of the European Parliament.
The new mechanism provided for in Article 7 on the warning procedure in the field of fundamental rights gives a major role to your institution.
A new legal basis has been laid down for the status of European political parties and Parliament has been given the status of institutional plaintiff laid down under Article 230 of the Treaty.
These are notable advances, even though I acknowledge that progress in extending codecision falls short of your expectations, and of those of the presidency.
Finally, in addition to the IGC, the need was felt to engage in a rigorous debate on a few issues that are crucial to the future of the European Union.
The further ahead Europe moves, the greater duty we have to strengthen its democratic legitimacy, the clarity and transparency of its institutions and to clarify the distribution of competences between the Union and the Member States.
Only by so doing will Europe be able to respond to the aspirations of its citizens.
With a view to achieving these objectives, a study on the future of Europe will be carried out, as decided by the European Council.
The European Parliament will, of course, be closely involved in this.
This study should be concluded in 2004.
We will thereby be responding to the concerns that have been expressed very forcefully in recent times.
This process will by no means constitute a precondition for enlargement and will therefore not delay this project.
These are, in short, the results of the institutional work carried out in Nice.
They will take Europe forward and I am delighted that the candidate countries have welcomed them so positively over the last few days.
This positive response bears witness to the fact that we have met their expectations.
After all, enlargement is clearly the major issue facing Europe today.
It is both a huge challenge and an historic milestone on the path towards the reunification of our continent.
The French Presidency has lent all its support to the progress of the negotiations.
Thirty new chapters were closed, including some in the most complex areas of Community legislation, and some countries, which have only just entered into negotiations, are already demonstrating their ability to catch up with the longer-standing candidates.
In Nice, on the basis of the excellent work carried out by the Commission, we gave ourselves a travel permit for the next eighteen months.
This is proof that the Union intends to forge ahead.
This is a powerful signal, which was given a very positive welcome at the meeting of the European Conference last Thursday.
In the last six months, Europe has also made progress in the field of growth and employment.
We have continued to deepen economic and monetary union, we have improved the coordination of our economic policies within the Eurogroup and have speeded up our joint preparation for the entry of the euro into the daily life of the European public.
In the last three weeks, progress has been made in three major areas.
First of all, the conclusion of the long-standing and difficult negotiations on the tax package, including savings tax and, secondly, the adoption of the European Social Agenda following a lengthy consultation procedure, particularly with our social partners.
The Union has thereby given itself a working programme that sets objectives and meetings for the next five years in the fields of employment law, social protection, mobility, lifelong training and the fight against discrimination and exclusion.
Finally, the adoption, not without difficulty, of the social chapter for European society took place at Nice. This is the culmination of a project that dates back thirty years.
The French Presidency is delighted to have been able to unravel the threads of these negotiations.
Next, the Union has begun to implement the Feira decisions on the new economy and growth.
We agreed on a significant lowering of Internet access costs.
This has been done. The Union decided to divide up access to the local loop.
We wanted to introduce a Community patent and the Union has given a commitment to establishing one and is including the necessary legal measures in the Treaty.
Ladies and gentlemen, France' s ambition for its presidency was also to respond to the concerns of the European public.
In Nice, we proclaimed the Union' s Charter of Fundamental Rights, a text of very great political importance.
Its significance will be assessed in the future and I wish to pay tribute to your Parliament which contributed so greatly to its drafting.
As a result of this Charter, our Union will be stronger and have greater guarantees of the values of dignity, freedom and solidarity that are its cornerstones.
We shall now echo this as widely as possible and very shortly consider its status.
I realise how much importance your Parliament attaches to this Charter.
Under this presidency, the Union has also given a new boost to cultural and student life in Europe.
Two months ago, our Education Ministers adopted an action plan for mobility - a forty-two point action plan - and we agreed on a substantial allocation of EUR 400 million for the Media-Plus programme, which is so important for European cinema and audiovisual services and which - as you will be aware - the whole profession was hoping for.
Perhaps you remember that I mentioned in this very Chamber France' s desire to ensure that the Union took greater account of the specific characteristics of sport and its social function.
This is the purpose of the declaration adopted at Nice and of the study that has been commissioned to coordinate the fight against doping at European level.
If we are to instil the adventure of European integration in people' s hearts we must also ensure that this union that we are building keeps its human face.
We must preserve the things to which every citizen is legitimately attached: a familiar environment, the balance of our territories, and a good quality of life, by which I mean services of general economic interest.
The presidency welcomes the fact that the discussion started within the Commission and the Council led to the adoption in Nice of a declaration that emphasises the crucial role of these services in maintaining Europe' s social and territorial cohesion.
Finally, in the course of the past six months, the presidency has firmly committed itself to making Europe respond better to the security needs of our citizens.
The presidency has one ambition, which is to be more protective, in the best sense of the word.
In Nice, therefore, we laid the foundations for an independent food safety authority.
The consequences of the mad cow epidemic are, of course, on everyone' s mind.
What was needed first and foremost was to re-establish consumer confidence by means of immediate measures, which were vigorously advocated by France and adopted at the last Agricultural Council, such as the ban on meat meal in animal feedingstuffs and the widespread use of screening tests for BSE.
Nor should we forget breeders and all the professions in the cattle industry that have been profoundly affected by this crisis and we have clearly highlighted this fact.
Something else that is also on everyone' s mind is maritime safety.
A year ago, the Erika ran aground off the French coast and despite the amazing mobilisation of charities and the authorities, the coast is still suffering the consequences of this shipwreck.
A few weeks ago, the chemicals tanker, the Ievolo Sun, sank just off the Channel Islands.
There must be no more occurrences of this type of disaster, which is caused by human negligence.
Over the last few months, the study of the Commission' s excellent proposals has made considerable progress.
Your Parliament gave a firm commitment, on 30 November, to a preliminary package of measures which, next week, will be submitted once again to our Transport Ministers.
The Swedish Presidency, one of whose priorities, I would remind you, is the environment, now has the task of concluding the second batch of proposals, which includes in particular, the creation of a European maritime safety agency.
As a quite exceptional case and in view of the urgency of the situation, the Nice Council urged the Member States to implement, in advance and as a preliminary stage, the aspects of this mechanism which will be subject to a political agreement.
As everyone knows, another threat we face is global warming.
At the Hague, the European Union rallied together to reach a credible and effective agreement, in line with the urgency and the importance of the issue.
We were able to demonstrate our coherence on the Kyoto commitments.
We will ceaselessly continue our efforts to convince our partners to commit themselves too.
Next year, we are due to conclude an agreement which will finally stipulate the necessary reduction in greenhouse gas emissions.
The Union has also made progress in the fight against organised crime: we now have a directive on the fight against money-laundering, concerted action has been taken against non-cooperating countries and territories identified by the Financial Action Task Force, Europol' s competences have been extended to the fight against dirty money and a European Police College has been created.
These are the main aspects of a coherent and broad range of measures.
This is the backdrop against which the provisional judicial cooperation unit "Eurojust" was created, foreshadowing the body for judicial cooperation in criminal matters whose creation, due to take place next year, is already included in the Treaty.
Finally, the French Presidency fostered an international ambition for Europe, a long-term ambition, which was to give the Union the means to assert itself in major world affairs, to have its voice heard and to be able to act.
This is the draft common foreign and defence policy.
The French Presidency also fostered a more immediate ambition, which was to show straightaway the political determination of the Fifteen to assert their own interests when European issues are at stake, and I am thinking here of south-eastern Europe in particular.
With regard to these two aims, we have indeed made progress.
First of all, at Nice we concluded the round of negotiations begun at the Cologne and Helsinki European Councils.
We set objectives for ourselves and they were achieved.
A year ago, we defined the military capabilities that the European Union should have by 2003 in order to be able to prevent and manage the type of crises envisaged by the Treaty.
The Member States then committed themselves to providing a contribution in terms of armed forces and military resources.
In addition to the troops themselves, the European Union will have the necessary resources for command, planning and intelligence gathering to lead complex joint army operations.
The Union intends to use this military wing in complete harmony with NATO facilities and, if necessary, with their support.
By making itself stronger, Europe will clearly be strengthening the North Atlantic Alliance.
Furthermore, at Nice, the European Union established the permanent bodies necessary to define and conduct a common foreign and security policy, which are: a political and security committee, a military committee and a European defence staff.
The decision was taken to include the creation of the political and social committee in the Treaty, as this is the real mainstay of the system.
Through delegation, the committee will be given decision-making powers when crisis management so requires.
The revision of the Treaty on this point confirms the importance and the irreversible nature of the decisions taken in Nice.
We were also concerned, even before these bodies were created, that the Union should have a greater say on the major international issues affecting its interests.
First of all, with regard to south-eastern Europe, we had to state more clearly what the aims and expectations of the European public were.
I think that this message was fully understood at the Zagreb Summit, which, for the first time, brought together the countries of the Western Balkans and the Fifteen.
The prospect of membership of the European Union was offered and every country saw that this path was also the path of peace, of human rights and of regional cooperation.
Admittedly, the Zagreb Summit did not solve all the problems, but it set a course to follow by means of the process of stabilisation and association; it consolidated the progress of democracy and defined a prospect which is in line with the values underpinning European action.
Furthermore, the Euro-Mediterranean Summit in Marseilles demonstrated, despite, unfortunately, the crisis is the Middle East, the importance attached by all the participants to maintaining and renewing the Barcelona process.
We can welcome the fact that the Union was able to announce that it would be dedicating some EUR 13 billion to the process over a period of seven years, including, of course, the loans from the European Investment Bank.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen of the European Parliament, I think that today I can say that in the last six months, our Union has gained strength from the process of preparing to welcome new members, to reunite the family now that we are all assured of being able to work together, to gain a firmer place in the hearts of our citizens in the fields of values, growth and employment, of solidarity, security and the preservation of the European social model and finally, to grow stronger and gain support on the international stage.
Credit for this progress must be given to all of the institutions.
I wish to pay tribute here to the quality of working relations between Member States within the Council.
I wish to pay tribute to the Commission and its President, Romano Prodi, and to his determination to bring the initiatives and projects listed in the Presidency' s programme to a successful conclusion.
Here, however, in this Chamber, on my own behalf, on behalf of the French Prime Minister and Government, I wish first and foremost to thank this House for its contribution.
It was crucial that the European Parliament, which is the mouthpiece for the European public and its ambitions, played a full role in taking the decisions that will affect the future of all of us.
France has been particularly aware of this.
You have often seen Mr Moscovici and the other ministers because the Council Presidency spoke 68 times on policy during your part-sessions and to the committees.
The French Presidency thanks you, Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, for this cooperation, for your support and also for the warm reception you have given us.
I wish to thank President Chirac and I shall give the floor straightaway to Mr Prodi, on behalf of the Commission.
Mr President, I give you the floor.
. (IT) Madam President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, ladies and gentlemen, the December 2000 European Council will be remembered as particularly lengthy and particularly complex.
This was always likely, given its agenda and indeed that is precisely what happened.
Positive decisions were taken at Nice, some of them long-awaited.
The Charter of Fundamental Rights was solemnly proclaimed.
I personally have no doubt that this is a seminal text and I would like to remind those who feel that it does not go far enough - and I know that many in this House are of this opinion - that it was drafted and conceived with care precisely with a view to giving it legal status.
Parliament and the Commission have already made it clear that, for their part, they intend to apply the Charter in full.
Ladies and gentlemen, the original foundations of a European Company Statute were laid over 30 years ago.
It is a legal instrument of obvious value which our operators had long been pressing for and which was sorely lacking during the major company restructuring we have experienced recently.
I am happy to say that now there is no longer anything to prevent us from implementing it rapidly.
With regard to enlargement, the strategy proposed by the Commission was endorsed.
The Social Agenda was also adopted, the fruit of productive cooperation with the Presidency, as has been pointed out.
The Commission's proposals on maritime safety and the creation of a European Food Safety Authority met with strong support, as did the decisions on our seven outermost regions.
These are some of the issues which were put before the Heads of State and Government.
I would mention one other issue which I can sense will be of considerable importance: the Council also discussed the way in which the summits are organised.
These events involve a huge amount of work, they are complex and they are held in a different place each time.
The European Council took the wise decision to move gradually towards holding them all in Brussels.
This will further reinforce the city's status as the capital of Europe
(Applause)
and, once the summits which have already been scheduled have taken place, one out of every two summits will be held in Brussels.
Once the European Union has grown to 18 Member States, the decision will apply to all the summits.
I sincerely believe that we should welcome this convincing initiative from Mr Chirac.
(Applause)
Moving on to the Intergovernmental Conference and the Treaty of Nice, I would first of all like to pay heartfelt tribute to Michel Barnier for his work.
(Applause)
He worked, as I did but to a greater extent, in collaboration with Parliament, particularly with Giorgio Napolitano and his Committee, with the two rapporteurs, Mr Leinen and Mr Dimitrakopoulos and, of course, with Mr Brok and Mr Tsatsos, whose commitment was total and absolute.
Finally, Madam President, I would like to praise the truly exemplary clarity of your own speeches to the meetings of the Council.
As you will remember, Madam President, the last time that I addressed this House, just before the Summit, I said that we needed a treaty with genuine added value.
In particular, I promised to return to this House with a frank assessment of the outcome.
Moreover, in your own address at the beginning of the Summit, you said that Parliament would judge the success of Nice in terms of quality as well as quantity.
It will be a little while before we can make a full, accurate assessment of the progress made at Nice, but we can at this stage hazard a few observations.
The first relates to the extension of qualified majority voting.
This is a quantitatively important step forwards because it has brought 30 or so new chapters under this umbrella.
As a result, qualified majority voting will increasingly become the general rule at the Council, and this must not be underestimated.
Qualitatively, the same cannot be said. Little or no progress was made on the sensitive issues of cohesion, tax regulation and social legislation.
(Applause)
In fact, in these areas, the Conference came up against the intransigence of some Member States.
This is something which deeply disappoints me, not just because of the short-term consequences but because the attitude behind it shows a lack of openness and understanding.
Anyone who sees Europe merely as a "clearing house"
(Applause)
to approach when necessary and to stay away from when they cannot get what they want or once they have got everything they want from it is not just making an error of historical analysis but is cheating future generations, who have the right to expect much more from Europe.
This inward-looking backdrop of reciprocal failure to make concessions does offer some small progress on justice and home affairs, however, although it has to be said that most of this progress has been deferred until after 2004.
This is not to belittle it.
It does, however, mean that the speed of development of the major new policy area of legal matters and cross-border crime, which was adopted in Tampere, is now under threat, and that the Tampere "scoreboard" will start to show delays.
I hope that these delays will not be blamed on Parliament or the Commission.
Lastly, I would like to take this opportunity to thank President Chirac and the French Prime Minister, Mr Jospin, for making it possible to put paid to the main ambiguities of our commercial policy.
A good balance was struck between the legitimate concerns surrounding issues such as cultural diversity, in particular, and the effectiveness of our powers of negotiating with our trading partners.
Another source of satisfaction lies in the result in the field of closer cooperation.
Ladies and gentlemen, I feel that what we have here is a tool that is vital for the enlarged Union, one that the Commission will make use of while taking care to play its "guarantor" role fully, firstly to make it possible for countries that wish to work together more closely towards major new common goals to do so, and secondly to counter any risk of fragmentation that unregulated use of such cooperation might bring.
On the subject of the institutions themselves I would like to say three things.
Where the Commission is concerned, there has been sweeping, far-reaching change.
The Commission will be able to grow to 26 members. After that, the necessary and much hoped-for alterations will be made.
These changes have been accompanied by the launching of major reform of the way in which the Commission is organised.
The President will be appointed by majority rather than unanimous vote.
After the vote of the Commission, the President will have the power to dismiss Commissioners and a wide degree of discretion regarding the actual organisation of the Commission itself, for example in matters such as the assigning of portfolios and the appointment of Vice-Presidents.
Parliament's main gain is a statute for political parties at European level.
The Commission defended - unfortunately with no success although the matter has not yet been closed - our shared concerns regarding the protection of the Union's financial interests by proposing that a Prosecutor should be established.
However, it is worrying that MEP numbers are being used essentially to counterbalance the equilibria in the Council.
Much greater attention will need to be devoted in the future to this and other related problems, and we must move from a defensive role to a more strongly proactive one.
Lastly, it was the weighting of votes in the Council that gave rise to the most difficult debate and the most difficult decision.
This was inevitable given the approach taken, but the outcome was regrettable for two reasons: firstly because it made a qualified majority more difficult and a blocking minority accordingly easier, whereas logically, in an expanding Union, the exact opposite is required;
(Applause)
and secondly because it has made the decision-making process even more complex, which runs counter to the legibility and transparency for which the citizens are calling.
(Applause)
To respond to our citizens' demands, we had advocated a double majority as the only solution which is objective, comprehensible and widely supported by smaller and larger countries alike.
(Applause)
At this juncture, we must pay particular tribute to the Belgian Prime Minister, Guy Verhofstadt, who fought to the very end for a more equitable presence for the candidate countries and to set the qualified majority threshold at a less unreasonable level - although one that is still too high.
He thus confirmed Belgium's great historic role in the European Union.
(Applause)
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, we must recognise that the hard-won conclusion of the Nice Summit was an achievement in itself.
A conclusion had to be reached and, thanks to the efforts of the Presidency, we got there in the end.
There are no leftovers from Nice.
The next step is to work realistically towards ratifying the Treaty as soon as possible.
This will enable us to move on to welcoming the new Members, in line with the Helsinki conclusions.
We must proceed resolutely in that direction.
Ladies and gentlemen, I feel - as President Chirac remarked - that the Nice Summit was characterised by the efforts of many to defend their own immediate interests, to the detriment of a long-term vision.
Nice does, however, include a declaration on the future of the Union which gives me cause for some optimism.
The Commission is aware of the importance of establishing a more precise division of competences between the European Union and the Member States.
Incorporating the Charter of Fundamental Rights into the Treaties, simplifying the layout of the Treaties and reviewing the role of our institutions.
This review must be an open, thorough discussion on a vast scale, involving the governments, parliaments and citizens of the current Member States and the candidate countries and demonstrating the dynamism of a Europe which is still being built.
There is a great need for such a discussion for the experience of Nice shows that the current method of reviewing the Treaties is no longer a valid one.
(Applause)
Like the Community structure itself, the process being used to produce institutional change is under stress and needs to be changed.
The Commission will come up with proposals for improving this process, and I am counting upon your participation and support.
Madam President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, ladies and gentlemen, after these initial, incomplete remarks which I have tried to put to you objectively and with conviction, I would appeal to everyone to remember that the final objective of the Nice Summit was, and still is, the unification of Europe.
The new Millennium has given us an unprecedented opportunity to bind together the countries of our continent in a wide area of peace, stability and economic growth.
Nice is a step in this direction: a shorter step than we had hoped for, or indeed, could have made, but a step in the right direction all the same.
I therefore ask you to lend us your support.
(Loud, sustained applause)
Madam President, Mr President-in-Office of the European Council, Mr President of the Commission, ladies and gentlemen, finally the Summit concluded with a result.
For now we have got out of the tight spot.
Now we need to look at the text carefully in Parliament.
For now, Mr President-in-Office of the European Council, I can tell you what is on the Council web site, or at least what was on it at 10.00 this morning: the Treaty will be available when it has been approved.
Please ask the Council staff to at least update the text.
I think that 'something' was approved in Nice.
In any case, the fact that an agreement has been reached is an achievement in itself.
Because it was not about residue, leftovers or ends to tie up from what was discussed in Amsterdam and not agreed on.
It was about fundamental issues for the governance of Europe, and we can now start working on this.
We are taking your word on the content of the agreement but, from what we are gradually discovering, there is not much cause for satisfaction.
It should be pointed out that, in principle, the aim of the Intergovernmental Conference was to improve the functioning of the Union in order to achieve enlargement.
I am afraid that we have before us a compromise between national interests that has been hammered out all in one go, at night, which will make it even more difficult to make Community decisions in the future.
Not only is the unanimity rule being maintained in a few crucial areas, but we also now have three types of qualified majority.
The level of 62% of the population has been replaced, according to some, by 71% and, according to others, by 73.49% in order to achieve a qualified majority.
The percentage is so high that it amounts to re-establishing a veto, especially for the largest countries.
This is a step backwards that applies to all areas of Community life, and I predict, Mr President-in-Office of the European Council, that our fellow citizens - and I am afraid also the Members of Parliament and the Heads of Government - are going to have to go back to school for lessons in arithmetic.
(Applause)
We will have to look very carefully at the role that has been allocated to the Commission and Parliament in the Union' s decision-making process.
If we want the Union to reflect the interests of all of its Member States and all of its peoples as a community of values, according to the Community method, the institutions that can guarantee this are the Commission and Parliament, acting within the framework of the Charter of Fundamental Rights.
If those institutions are weakened and the Charter remains outside of the Treaty, how are we going to bring Europe closer to its citizens?
At the same time, the declaration on enlargement - which is a positive one - says that the applicant countries will be able to join the Union at the end of 2002, and the Heads of Government of the countries that are in negotiations have welcomed Nice.
Now we have to take something into account: this is like when a child invites his friends to a birthday party and it is not sure whether there is enough room in the house or whether there is enough money for the food.
We have to be responsible in our commitments.
How have we come to this situation?
It is too easy to blame the President-in-Office of the Council, especially as the majority of the political families represented here are also represented in the Council.
And we have come to this situation because the method of the Intergovernmental Conference no longer works.
How can the Union make constitutional decisions by staying up for three nights?
What was the point of eleven months of Intergovernmental Conference, two conclaves and countless meetings of the General Affairs Council?
(Applause)
I would like to point out, by the way, Mr President-in-Office of the European Council, that this is paid for by taxpayers.
How can decisions that reflect the dual legitimacy of the Union be made by only one side?
I would like to make an appeal to you: no more Intergovernmental Conferences behind closed doors.
(Applause)
In the declaration on the future of the Union - which I welcome on behalf of my Group - for the first time there is a mention of the need to renew its working methods: the need for a wider debate in which all the parties involved can take part.
There is already such a method. It is the convention method: nine months, a happy delivery...
(Applause)
...while in Nice, we still do not know what the child is like.
And I really think that we should use the convention method to determine the future of the Union.
To conclude, Mr President-in-Office of the European Council, Mr President of the Commission, ladies and gentlemen, it is certain that, as far as the subjects of Nice that you yourself, Mr Chirac, pointed out - the European Company Statute, the Social Agenda, mad cow disease, maritime safety - there are sufficient causes to say that the Summit was a success.
As far as the institutional matters are concerned, however, we will have to study them and make a judgment.
Today, we cannot take a decision.
We want to make a positive contribution, but now - and I will now conclude, Madam President - in order to live up to our ambitions, what we have to do is ask the Swedish Presidency to initiate the process of debate, in which we need precision timing, because it is what this Union needs, positively affirming our defence policy and developing the Community method.
This is the challenge that we now face.
(Applause)
Madam President, Mr President of the Republic, Mr President of the Commission, ladies and gentlemen, my group takes a very dim view of the Fifteen following the rather unappetising spectacle they put on for the European people, who were probably amazed to see on that occasion, and at first hand, the real common vision, sense of solidarity and mutual trust that exists between the major European leaders.
Although, despite everything, I welcomed the conclusion of an agreement with a certain amount of relief, I did so because, as Mr Cox said, a failure at Nice would have been used by the shameless opponents of enlargement if not to sound the death knell, at least to call for the indefinite postponement of this great project.
We would then have sent the peoples of Central and Eastern Europe a signal of incalculable political consequences.
There is nothing less secure today than a successful enlargement but at least the way remains open for action in favour of such a prospect.
Besides, what a cruel illustration of the crisis which is not only institutional, but which, at a deeper level, is an identity crisis for European integration in the face of the titanic issues confronting the European Union!
The problem facing the Fifteen lies, I believe, less in their difficulty in providing sound responses, than in their refusal to address the right questions.
We feel that the right questions are those on the lips of the impressive human tide which converged on Nice from all over Europe on the eve of the Summit.
This was not a handful of troublemakers from the margins of society but workers who were uniting with the most representative waves of public opinion in their respective countries.
Some of them were supporters of the beginnings of European integration and probably voters - men and women - from most of the political families represented here.
Beyond their differences, all their questions in one way or another concerned a fundamental issue: the purpose of this integration whose institutions we wish to reform.
For whom is it designed?
What is its point?
Where is this Europe of the Fifteen headed today, and even more to the point, the great Europe with twenty-seven or thirty, tomorrow?
Is it condemned to collapse under the current system of liberal globalisation?
Is its purpose to speed up the process of deregulation?
To make competition the be all and end all of their economic policy?
To try to destroy everything that is the essence of our societies through the rationale of commerce, to the point that people need to rally together to achieve a few exceptions and to concentrate all the power at the top, far from everyday life and far from the people?
Is there any more relevant question than that of whether other choices are conceivable?
Choices in which most members of the public can recognise themselves?
Major joint projects in Europe itself and on the international stage, in which they would find reasons and pleasure in committing themselves together, projects designed to achieve a shared dominance of the markets, a common, proactive political approach in the economic, social and cultural fields, real access for social actors to the necessary information and to the decision-making and control procedures, from their company to the institutions.
What preliminary answers to these legitimate questions did the Nice European Council give the public?
The Charter of Fundamental Rights, which was supposed to be a figurehead for this summit was dispatched without ceremony.
Neither is the European defence force, along with the military language that has accompanied its miraculously rapid creation, able to give the European adventure the boost that it needs.
Symptomatically, it is in the few areas in which the demand for concrete measures had been clearly demonstrated in our societies that a few positive agreements have finally been reached between the Fifteen.
I am thinking of food safety, maritime safety, the declaration on the specific nature of sport with regard to competition rules or even the European Company Statute.
With regard to the Social Agenda, although we would be hard pushed to find the specific objectives that we hoped for, at least it offers elements that will provide support for action in the next five years.
That may be true, but this does not make a project and unless there is a common project, institutional reform could only lead to a form of soulless and unceremonious inter-State horse-trading.
To conclude, I share my group' s view that the Nice European Council will ultimately have been the turning point for a kind of institutional and political construction that has shown its limitations and has reached the end of its useful life.
The absence of a coherent, comprehensible, and inspiring common project, the refusal to hold a public and transparent debate on the various options due to an apparent consensus, which is inevitably liberal and hostile to any sign of independence from the established order, the exacerbation of violent relations between partners from the same Community and the excessive concentration of power in the leadership of States over the heads of their citizens - these are all issues that are not recent but which are now undeniable in the open debate on Europe' s future.
Thank you.
Mr President, I should first of all like to congratulate you on the marvellous stamina that you demonstrated at the Nice marathon.
My congratulations must end there, however, as I am sorry that you did not apply this stamina to the subjects that were entrusted to you.
You said that the Nice Summit was a success because it finally led to an agreement.
I would say to you, "big deal!" because everyone knew from the outset that the French Presidency was set on doing everything to ensure that an agreement was reached in Nice, largely for reasons of domestic politics.
I wish to say, at the risk of destroying your illusions, that no one here has been fooled.
The obstacles between the Fifteen that multiplied during the Summit are symptomatic.
Any clear-thinking person can see that they herald the very serious consequences to which the project of a Federal Europe of 27 or 28 Member States is leading us.
The most astonishing thing is that you are cobbling together this pipe dream at a time when the opinion polls suggest that the majority of Europe' s citizens are against this.
Speaking mainly on behalf of the French members of my group, I will say that there is a permanent contradiction between the virtues attributed to this Europe and the aberrations seen in the daily workings of the Union.
Europe' s leaders, of which you are one, are reduced to carrying out increasingly frequent operations to manipulate the media and public opinion.
The technique is now tried and tested: always put off for another time the burden of proof; take decisions that are void of content or which will not be implemented for a long time and finally present the whole business as a magnificent success.
The Nice summit is to some extent the apotheosis of this sleight-of-hand strategy.
First of all, the Fifteen signed the agreement on the sly and under the smokescreen created by the Charter of Fundamental Rights.
This document is a monument of ambiguity and was presented by some people as a crucial text, which would be a prelude to a future European constitution, and by others, as a simple declaration of intent with no legal force.
This text has been exalted as the democratic progress of a citizens' Europe but no one has bothered, of course, to find out what the European public actually wants.
You yourself, Mr President and your Prime Minister have presented this text as the triumph of French secularism and by Chancellor Schröder as the victory of German religious sentiment.
All it took to achieve this was quite simply to have the French and German versions of the Charter not say the same thing.
We should have thought about that!
The Nice Summit then adopted a European Social Agenda, but this document has no binding power.
It simply sets a handful of objectives for the next five years, which the Member States are free to decide whether to pursue or not, depending on the policies they choose.
Then the summit announced that an agreement had been concluded on maritime safety.
Hallelujah! Is this a decisive agreement?
Not at all. It is simply a decision inviting the Member States' Transport Ministers to agree on the measures needing to be taken.
Let us add to this list of triumphs the announcement of the creation of a food agency that will not come into operation until 2001. To crown it all, the European leaders who met at Nice decided to open a new institutional project in 2004.
This will - apologies for it being so minimal - clarify the European Treaties, the precise status of the Charter of Fundamental Rights and lay down the distribution of competences between the Union and the Member States.
There is clearly something rotten about the whole business.
From evasions to pretences and from hypocritical agreements to sermons on the future, this Federal Europe is beginning to look like a house of cards whose roofs are growing higher and higher but whose foundations are quaking, because the real lesson of the Nice Summit is the enormity of the historical misunderstanding in which our continent has been mired since the Treaty of Maastricht.
The Member States do not have the support of the people because there is no such thing as a European people and they are therefore forced by public opinion to advocate their national interests with increasing fervour, even if this means changing the maximum number of Members of the European Parliament set by the Treaty of Amsterdam, which is already out of date, and even if this means increasing the number of European Commissioners to 27, even though the current Commission of Fifteen does not work.
Mr President, I also wish to emphasise that, after Nice, France appears once again to have been the clear loser.
Because you are paralysed with the fear of having fewer seats than Germany in the Council of Ministers, you have definitively capitulated on everything else: on the number of French Members in this Chamber, which is reduced from 87 to 74 - oh, I agree, this would not be a big loss - whereas Germany will keep its 99 Members without losing a single one: at least for the sake of those who believe that this House serves some purpose, the number ought to have been maintained; on the so-called "demographic slice" principle, which gives a considerable advantage to Germany; on one of the two Commissioners in Brussels and on our right of veto in the very many areas concerning our vital interests.
The final result is preposterous.
No one understands the operating rules of this labyrinthine system any more.
It upsets almost everyone, beginning with those known as the smaller countries.
The only clear outcome is that the European nation-states are on their way - unwillingly - to becoming nothing more than provinces within an authoritarian federal state, whose strategic and military objectives appear to be those of the United States.
This will happen unless we oppose it. We must bring an immediate end to this insane abdication of the sovereignty of the European Nations.
This is why, as far as we are concerned, we will ask the President of France to consult the French people at the appropriate time by means of a referendum on this Treaty.
(Applause)
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, the masochism with which French political leaders have, once again, allowed themselves to be ensnared in the trap of a Europe obsessed with complex, intricate manoeuvres is incredible.
Having wallowed in cohabitation, these professional politicians have lain down in resignation over a treaty that they just had to sign in Nice as if Germany' s fate depended on it.
Portugal and Belgium have, on this occasion, had a greater influence than France, which conceded on everything and obtained nothing apart from preserving a vague cultural exception, which is a pretext for a new concept, which Mr Védrine has invented, for the sake of the cause, of a sovereignty that would be both national and exercised jointly.
Even Edgar Faure must be turning in his grave!
At a time when these so-called leaders are incapable of transposing fifty or so directives except by edict, in other words, by decree-law, they are accepting, with straight faces, to reduce French representation in the European Parliament by around 20%, despite having given these representatives the task of protecting French interests under codecision.
As far as France is concerned, each of these Treaties is, unfortunately, worse than the one before, but they confirm the rationale of Maastricht, a fine example of Mitterrandesque finagling that is likely to end badly.
And what about poor Mr Chirac, who believes what Gerhard says, in the same way that Jaurès believed in world peace!
Into what situation will all these people have dragged France when the European bubble bursts and the French have nothing in their mouths but the bitter taste of having been conned once again by their mediocre and self-serving leaders?
Madam President, Mr President, the Group for a Europe of Democracies and Diversities regrets the fact that the Presidency has not followed up the message that was sent to it in July.
At Nice, it simply boosted the power of the technocrats.
The crisis within the Commission has not led to any reform of its role or of the way in which it functions.
All that has been proposed to us is an increase of its President' s powers and I doubt that even this would have prevented the dysfunction demonstrated by the Santer Commission.
The negotiations of the last few days have proved that it was nothing but a laughable process of haggling.
People are fighting over power of influence and postponing the distribution of competences and the clarification of the European Union' s objectives until 2004, even though making everything uniform is still clearly the order of the day.
We are told of parity between the larger States but the division is confirmed with 27 additional seats being allocated to just one country.
Enough hypocrisy!
The right of each Member State to be heard within the Council should have been recognised in Nice.
For this to happen, one vote is enough and would enable us to avoid the countless calculations of weighting imposed by qualified majority voting.
Taking into account these interests and differences within the Council would have avoided the debates on the number of Commissioners to which each State is clinging.
When I hear a Commissioner calling for an end to the cultural exception and for the extension of qualified majority voting to Article 133 in international negotiations, I must state that, personally, the loss of one Commissioner would not be particularly serious.
This House ought to represent the expression of an elected majority that backs the decisions of ministers who, I would remind you, are answerable to their respective national parliamentary representations.
You chose to follow another path. We find this truly deplorable and it will benefit neither Europe itself nor any Member State.
With regard to the Summit' s conclusions, I am stunned to see the discrepancy between the proclamations on the services of general interest and the dismantling of the postal service, which is on the agenda for this part-session.
My fear is that the objective of full employment, which is part of the Social Agenda, may suffer the same fate.
As far as Europe' s image is concerned, this Presidency has been a failure.
The common interest appears to diminish the signing of a treaty that is designed to provide solutions by transferring ever more sovereignty against the wishes expressed by the public.
Furthermore, we could adopt the formula suggested by the Economic and Social Council and say that Europe is experiencing a serious lack of public debate.
Sometimes out of convenience or as a matter of urgency, the issue is dodged or cut short and sometimes a debate does take place but the experts and the elites are often the only players that are heard, that are listened to and who really influence decision-making.
The danger of this is that the public will feel alienated from the decisions that actually concern them directly.
My group is disappointed by this Treaty and is worried about the future that it holds for us and we will therefore use all our power to oppose it.
Madam President, President Chirac, I am delighted that you have found time today, in contrast to the previous occasion, to listen to my speech.
I take it as a welcome sign of the fact that tensions have eased since then.
While waiting for the outcome from Nice, I was put in mind of my old mathematics professor.
Two out of four problems unsolved elicited a pitiless "unsatisfactory" from him.
Until late into Sunday, it looked like Nice too might earn such a mark.
Then a compromise was found.
In essence, the total compromise is less than the sum of its parts.
Nonetheless, from an Austrian point of view, it is a result we can live with.
I personally welcome, above all, the juridification of all stages of the sanctions procedure, especially the facility for the Court of Auditors to exercise control.
As an Austrian I know what I am talking about.
The rule of law has triumphed here over political arbitrariness.
Many have complained about the lack of progress on qualified majority voting.
I take a more relaxed view.
The heads of state and government may have exercised restraint in certain areas, but at least they did not use their right of veto after long hours of negotiation just for the heck of it.
On the contrary, their restraint was driven by serious problems and concerns and the result of informed national opinion, which cannot be swept to one side and must be taken seriously.
How can we make our citizens identify more closely with Europe if we do not heed their concerns?
For many citizens, things are simply moving too fast.
Many still have no sight of the port into which the European Union is supposed to sail one day.
As far as I am concerned, deliberate, considered action makes far more sense than rushing into the fray.
However, what is worrying in this situation, and this is something which both I and Mr Poettering have warned against, is that the instrument of reinforced cooperation may be used as a circumvention strategy in areas in which no decision can be reached by a qualified majority.
This sort of approach would not only contradict the ultima ratio clause; it would, in my view, also represent a serious threat to the development of the Union.
Thank you, Mr Hager.
At this stage in the debate, I shall give the floor once again to the President-in-Office of the Council, President Chirac, who would like to respond to the speeches by the group chairmen, following which, President Chirac will leave us and Mr Moscovici will take over.
Mr President, I give you the floor.
I want to thank President Jacques Chirac for being here this morning, and for his speech and his replies to the group chairmen.
(The debate was suspended at this point and resumed at 3.00 p.m.)
VOTE
Mr President, could we please check before the vote that enough members are present in the Chamber to give us the 314 votes needed or if the other two reports should perhaps go first, because there has been some confusion as to how long this break is supposed to last.
In all events, we must be careful not to upset the compromise which we have now reached simply because some members are unaware of the fact that we are about to vote.
On the subject itself, I have just one brief technical comment.
This is a complicated subject.
We must back medical progress and, at the same time, ensure that subjects are protected during trials.
The committee accepted the report unanimously.
Nonetheless, a number of proposed amendments have been tabled, as the Commissioner rightly says.
They are compromise amendments designed to bring about agreement with the Council.
The Council has asked us to accept the spirit of the report but to change the wording here and there.
Hence these proposed amendments, these so-called compromise amendments from three groups.
I think they reflect the views not just of these three groups but of other groups which have refrained from putting their name to them for technical reasons.
I therefore call on the House to accept these compromise amendments and to reject the new proposals which have now been tabled by other groups so as to avoid jeopardising the compromise with the Council.
Not because I am opposed to the proposals in principle but because I want to safeguard the compromise with the Council and avoid risking a complicated and tricky conciliation procedure for the sake of an amendment.
In order to make full use of this compromise, I should like to ask the presidency to vote on proposed Amendment No 22, which is scheduled right at the beginning of the vote, after Amendment No 43, because Amendment No 43 reflects the compromise with the Council, while Amendment No 22 reflects the committee's original position and should only be adopted if the compromise does not win a majority here in the House.
Before the vote on Amendment No 22:
Mr President, I just want to avoid any confusion. As we have already accepted the compromise, I recommend that the House vote against Amendment No 22.
That will keep us in line with the compromise with the Council.
Apart from that, thank you all for your support.
(The President declared the amended Common Position approved)
Report (A5-0356/2000) by Mrs Honeyball on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive on summer-time arrangements [COM(2000) 302 - C5-0322/2000 - 2000/0140(COD)]
Mr President, I should like to know if the European Parliament's jurisdiction for summer time has been newly acquired since Nice.
Mr President, I voted for the report on regulations relating to the performance of clinical trials with a view to finding new medicinal products.
Before I left Bergamo for Strasbourg, I told Mr Giuseppe Rossi, a pensioner from Bergamo about this, and he said that he was very happy about this regulation.
However, he urged me to draw Parliament's attention - which I am very willing to do - to the fact that, when selecting the diseases for which it is intended to find complete cures by performing clinical trials on new medicinal products, priority should be given to diseases affecting the elderly, in particular, who do not have time to wait for trials to be performed, unlike youngsters who have all the time in the world.
Therefore, priority must be given to the diseases affecting the elderly.
The Union for a Europe of Nations Group has supported Mr Liese' s report.
It was really necessary to simplify the plethora of legal and administrative arrangements applying to clinical trials in the Member States.
Promoting the development of medicines in the Community is desirable because that makes it possible to give patients a better chance of benefiting from high-performance treatment.
Research also needs to be promoted into medicines for children, and the Health Ministers of the various Member States must rally behind it.
Two-thirds of children' s medicines were in fact designed for adults.
For lack of data, their marketing authorisation (MA) does not provide for use with children.
So use in paediatric medicine sometimes falls under the heading of empirical individual prescriptions, and we need to promote the development at pharmaceutical laboratories of specific products prepared for children and their pathologies so that the doses and forms of the medicines are suited to their bodies.
Dr Liese' s report means we can establish shorter time periods, harmonisation of procedures, and above all, a high level of protection, especially for children.
As a result of the determination shown by both the Member States and Parliament, laboratories previously discouraged by the complexity of clinical trials will perhaps find the courage to develop the market for children' s medicines, even if it is not yet big enough to provide a return on the investment!
Furthermore, the legitimate determination to protect patients who take part in trials at Union level is inseparable from respect for the principle of subsidiarity.
So the conditions for consent must be very strict.
In our view, trials on people incapable of giving their consent should be banned.
Here Dr Liese' s determination to lay down stricter conditions for consent by persons incapable of giving it is interesting.
We think consent should be governed by national legislation.
While it is appropriate to establish a set of rules to be taken into account, the Member States must retain the power to adopt stricter legislation, as France has done in this respect.
That would merely be an intelligent application of the principle of subsidiarity.
Honeyball report (A5-0356/2000)
Mr President, when Mr Enrico Perniceni of Locatello Imagno in the province of Bergamo, my home town, discovered we were going to debate this directive he said: "Mr Fatuzzo, I know that I am a very old man but I would like my time never to come.
If my time does have to come, I would like it to be the same time throughout the European Union!
I therefore ask you to vote for the motion" - which I did - "because it is right for Europe to have a European time to go with the European currency, the European Parliament and the European flag.
In fact, I feel that it is right for all the States of the European Union to be on the same summer time" .
I congratulate my colleague Mary Honeyball on her first report for the European Parliament.
Summer time should be a matter for the Member States but it is right that the EU should harmonise the start and end dates.
I welcome the agreement to continue to begin summer time on the last Sunday in March and to end it on the last Sunday in October.
Given the planning needs of certain sectors such as transport, communications, tourism and computer and other technology I welcome the proposal to make these arrangements permanent subject to a Commission review every five years.
Summer time has, in practice, become normal time.
There may therefore be cause for questioning the concept of 'summer time' when it relates to seven out of twelve months, that is to say the majority of the year.
Do we really have to carry on with the change to summer time? It was brought in at the time of the oil crises, to save energy and has been extended to 2001?
First we should recognise that the advantages and value of the arrangement have largely vanished: the energy saving it was supposed to produce is completely unproven and merely symbolic.
On the contrary, in addition to atmospheric pollution problems, the profound disturbance to human beings, especially children, of this double time-change, taking place in March and then in October, is clearly established and greatly resented by the people, many of whom are calling for the cancellation of this arrangement which upsets the rhythms of life.
The report financed by the Commission to justify its proposal merely notes the inadequacy of the consistent data available and the contradictory nature of existing studies: so it does not provide any relevant grounds for maintaining the time change system.
Now, the Commission proposes to make the change to summer time, and then back to winter time, permanent with no limit date.
It means to impose this on the Member States without the option of exemption, and on the candidate countries, without taking account of their specific geographic position.
Nothing, not even time, must escape its standardising will!
It must be the same time in Brest as in Brest-Litovsk.
The advantages of time zones cannot possibly outweigh the benefits of standardisation!
Long live the single federal time!
Yet the choice of time applicable in each of the Member States is always a purely national decision, by virtue of the principle of subsidiarity.
The national governments must not give up that right.
They must continue to be concerned about representing the will of the people who have elected them.
Instead of the one proposed by the Commission, the best solution would undoubtedly be to give up the summer time arrangement and keep GMT + 1 hour for the whole year, at least as far as France is concerned.
From this angle, I am glad two amendments were adopted by Parliament, one rejecting the Commission' s plan to apply the summer time arrangement for an indefinite period, and the other allowing the Member States, like the European institutions, to retain the option of reviewing this arrangement.
Mr President, I should like to give an explanation on the Honeyball report.
I am sorry, Madam, but I have no record here of your application to give an explanation of vote.
As you know, an application must be submitted in writing in advance.
It is obviously an oversight but, as I am sure you will understand, I cannot make an exception, otherwise we shall get embroiled in Rules of Procedure.
That brings us to the explanations of vote on the Cerdeira Morterero report.
Somewhat surprisingly, Mr Fatuzzo has the floor;
I wonder which pensioner has said something to him this time.
Cerdeira Morterero report (A5-0355/2000)
You are going to be surprised, Mr President, for this time, before I left for Strasbourg, it was Mr Carlo Fatuzzo the tourist who said to Mr Carlo Fatuzzo the MEP - we talk to each other sometimes in the mirror - "Seeing as you are going to debate the issue of the protection of victims, remember that last year I went to Spain on holiday and, when I got out my wallet in front of the Sagrada Familia to make a donation in order to make my humble contribution to the conclusion of the work on this structure, both wallet and all the documents inside disappeared.
I went to the Spanish police station immediately and reported the incident before you could say 'Jack Robinson'.
But when I got back to Italy, Mr Fatuzzo," continued Carlo Fatuzzo the tourist, "in order to obtain another identity card and another driving licence, I had to report the incident again, this time to the Italian police.
I had to report the same theft twice.
Therefore, roll on the advent of this directive which will simplify the procedures!"
The status of the victims in criminal proceedings is not always properly protected.
This matter has been taken up in several Council of Europe instruments since the early 80s, but within the European Union it was not debated in the Council until 1998.
Since then, there have appeared first the Commission proposal, in the run-up to the 1999 Tampere European Council, which put forward a number of measures in the fields of the prevention of victimisation and victim aid and support and upheld the need to draw up minimum standards especially for victim protection and for the access of victims to justice and their right to compensation for damages, including legal costs, and secondly the Portuguese Presidency' s draft framework decision on the status of the victim in criminal proceedings.
This latter proposal is the subject of this report, which essentially warrants our approval, particularly as regards the simplification of access to rights, courts and legal information, and the promotion and protection of victims' rights in matters of compensation for loss and damages through redress mechanisms.
We are very much in favour of strengthening the position of victims of crime and therefore welcome in principle the draft framework decision presented by Portugal.
Above all, we are in favour of setting up, at European level, principles for how the victims of crime are to be treated. Nonetheless, the Member States ought themselves to be responsible for working out the details.
We believe, however, that a couple of questions need to be analysed more thoroughly and would present the following points of view.
Freedom of association is of fundamental importance in a democratic constitutional State, which is why we oppose a demand for non-profit-making organisations to be approved by the State before they are allowed to offer support to victims of crime.
We also believe that transparency is a prerequisite if authorities and courts are to inspire confidence in citizens, which is why we oppose general rules limiting the press' s ability to write about what has come to light in the course of a public trial.
Only in a few clearly defined cases (relating, for example, to sexual crimes and crimes involving child pornography, where secrecy is required) may there be exemptions from holding open proceedings in court.
Finally, we think it may be a good idea for there to be video conferencing and other such facilities if there is reason for thinking that a witness or plaintiff might, out of fear or for some other reason, not speak the truth freely in the presence of the defendant.
. I welcome this report by my colleague Carmen Cerdiera.
The report aims to ensure that all victims of crime in any EU Member State should receive the same minimum treatment.
Appropriate measures should be taken to provide crime victims with the following rights: to provide and receive information; communications facilities; participation in the procedure and access to free legal aid; a suitable level of protection and privacy; the possibility to seek compensation under criminal procedure and to dispute settlement through mediation.
The victim must be treated as a person in a particular situation of disorientation and distress - factors that are likely to be all the more acute if the crime happens to the victim in a Member State other than his/her own.
. Although we support the content of the report and are very sympathetic to victims of crime throughout Europe, I, as a British Conservative, have reservations regarding certain aspects of the report.
I believe we have adequate protection for such victims under Article 6 of the Council of Europe's Convention on Human Rights, and this report is yet another example of unnecessary proposed European interference into an area which is already covered by agreements between Member States, as well as 25 other non-EU members of the Council of Europe.
The British Conservative Party does not support EU prescriptive measures to harmonise criminal law in the EU which must remain the competence of the Member State.
Madam President, I wholeheartedly support this report on better protection for victims of crime which demonstrates yet again in the EU's commitment to combating crime and protecting our citizens.
We are trying to ensure that the rights and interests of victims of crime are better respected in all EU Member States, even when the crime itself has been committed outside the victim's usual country of residence.
Consequently, many travellers and holidaymakers will benefit from this European initiative.
This measure will help allow victims of crime to be able to claim full, immediate and effective compensation for any damage suffered, if possible to be paid by the perpetrator of the crime.
Combating crime is crucial for my constituents in the North West.
The Labour Government is cracking down on crime and disorder.
With Labour, crime is already down 10% since 1997.
Domestic burglary is down by 21% and vehicle crime by 15% - their lowest levels for a decade.
The six-year decline in police numbers has been halted - 9000 extra recruits will take police numbers to their highest level ever.
The Queen's Speech spells out that our next step is to cut violent crime and disorder by working together. The Tories, on the other hand, offer nothing but rising crime and falling investment.
The Tories, on the other hand, offer nothing but rising crime and falling investment.
Their record on law and order speaks for itself: during their time in office, the chance of being a victim of burglary increased from one in 32 to one in 13; the chance of being a victim of violent crime trebled.
Madam President, the Labour Government is determined to be tough on crime and tough on the causes of crime.
By introducing greater protection for victims of crime across Europe, our citizens will gain confidence in the judicial system and the police, not just across Britain, but right across the European Union.
(The sitting was suspended at 1 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m.)
European Council/ French Presidency (continuation)
The next item is the continuation of the joint debate on:
the report by the European Council and the statement by the Commission on the European Council Meeting of 7 to 10 December 2000 in Nice;
the statement by the officiating President of the Council on the French Presidency.
Mr President, on a point of order.
This has great relevance to the matter we are discussing since it touches on the freedom of the press and the independent ownership of the media in Russia.
A few hours ago the owner of most of Russia's independent television, Mr Vladimir Gusinsky, was arrested in Spain.
I am told he is due to be deported to Russia.
I should like to protest at this most serious development and ask that investigations be made.
Mr Gusinsky is presently in an aircraft on his way to Madrid where he faces deportation to Russia for criticising the Russian Government in his media activities.
Lord Bethell, I think we would agree with you.
We will look into the matter.
We will make a note of it now and naturally we feel like you that the freedom of the press must continue to be observed in that part of the world.
Mr President, it is my turn to salute the President of the Commission, who is here, and the Presidency of the Council, which is coming, and to underline that there has probably never been such unanimity expressed in this Parliament on the results of a summit.
This morning we heard every group speak of failure.
If we look for the causes of that failure, the main reason seems to be that in Nice we saw the European project suffer a little more damage and the European dream recede a little further.
What is that dream about?
It is not about a trading area. It is not even about a cooperation area.
The European dream is about a continent with common values building itself into a political power.
Put another way, it is about neighbours who regard each other as members of the same family, and decide to build a ship together to weather the storms.
But that would mean recognising that the common project is more important than selfish interests.
Now, in Nice - and this is the criticism we all have - the project was not being considered, only the interests were being considered.
It is as if the ship were already built and we were at the stage of sharing out the cabins, the officers' uniforms and the cargo.
That explains why many of us found Nice heartbreaking.
It was heartbreaking to see the debates concentrating on who would get one vote more or one vote less, and who would gain - Germany or France, the Netherlands or Belgium, Portugal or Spain.
The only question that was never asked was whether or not Europe would gain.
The results were heartbreaking.
In future it will be necessary to assemble three different majorities for a decision to be taken - 75% of the votes, 50% of the Member States, and 62% of the populations.
That is inexplicably Byzantine for the citizens.
Heartbreaking results for the Commission which was regarded, not as the guardian of the general interest, but as yet another intergovernmental body, wrenched away from the collegiate rule and symbolically excluded from the 'confessionals' .
Heartbreaking results for Parliament: the refusal to see majority decisions seriously extended; the exclusion of Parliament from codecision and - I say this in passing - the shocking fact that the composition was fixed without Parliament even being consulted on that composition.
Finally and above all, heartbreaking results for the citizens, who find themselves excluded once and for all from these carpet salesmen' s debates about a Europe where they are condemned never to understand anything.
The European dream must be relaunched and the European project rebuilt. That will be the whole purpose of the third stage, the new stage we are entering.
Mr President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, Mr President of the Commission, ladies and gentlemen, one image strikes us as we leave Nice behind. There are basically two Europes: one that works and one that asks itself questions.
The one that works is the one that has after all, it seems to me, spent the six months getting the work done in six essential areas, under the leadership of the French Presidency.
Let us just note for the record the Social Agenda and the European company; strengthening Euroland and the tax package; the conference on commitment capability and the progress of Defence Europe; safety, whether in food or at sea; young people' s mobility and the recognition of the specific features of sport or the Media plus programme; and the important statement on services of general interest.
Yes, practical Europe continues to make progress, but what struck our fellow citizens at Nice was that the Europe asking itself where it is going and what it wants sometimes looks all at sea.
There is one piece of good news, certainly.
Europe is now ready, thirteen years after the fall of the Berlin Wall, to welcome the Central and Eastern European countries knocking at our door.
But as we said in this Parliament, a narrow agenda means the issues on the table have to be dealt with. It does not offer a way out.
At Maastricht, we had the euro to dream about.
At Amsterdam, we had the area of freedom, security and justice, and the employment chapter.
But at Nice, there was nothing but the crude sharing out of power and then we saw national egoism on parade.
There will be no Nice leftovers, but was there a European spirit at Nice?
We are not sure there was.
We all know there is a collective responsibility for this sad balance sheet, be it that of the 'small countries' or the 'big countries' , be it that of the founding countries or those joining later.
Nice will make enlargement possible, but without a plan, without a soul, without ambition, without vision.
We can say what we like about the state of mind of our fellow citizens, but the responsibility is ours and they expect us to deliver this European project, this European dream.
I have a few comments to make, and the first is on the Charter.
The Heads of State and Government sometimes give the impression that they almost took themselves by surprise at the Cologne European Council when they initiated a process whose results, in the end, would frighten them.
How can we accept the fact that this Charter, which carries our dreams, hopes and ambitions, should in the end be proclaimed on the sly and that, at the end of the day, the only thing proposed for 2004 is an examination of the status of the Charter?
There is no longer even any mention of its possible incorporation and, in the final analysis, the only institution to emerge from this exercise strengthened is the Court of Justice, which will be able to incorporate this Charter into Community legislation, even before the Heads of State and Government.
Then there is the issue of chief concern to this Parliament, qualified majority voting.
How could we not express our disappointment?
The scope of qualified majority is narrower than expected.
On the essential issues of tax and social affairs, there is no progress.
Things are more difficult because instead of just one criterion, there are three criteria to be fulfilled.
Things are more complicated because there are these appeal clauses in the new Treaty, making the process even more incomprehensible to our fellow citizens.
From Parliament' s viewpoint, alongside qualified majority there is still the issue of codecision.
For us, that is essential.
It is sometimes caricatured as not being democratic, as taking too long, but democracy takes time, and time is necessary for debates.
We call for that debate to be launched.
Sometimes, it has seemed as if, at the end of the day, in the conference, at Nice, the European Parliament was serving as an adjustment variable.
But yes, Mr Bayrou, let us admit that we also bear the responsibility for that.
We were not capable of expressing how we wanted Parliament organised.
On method, I think the Nice perspectives, from that point of view, are very interesting.
The Heads of State and Government have just recognised at Nice what we were saying after Amsterdam: the Intergovernmental Conference method is no longer successful for Europe.
So we welcome the prospect of a new method and we trust that, with the hope offered by the possibility of enhanced cooperation, Europe will continue to advance and will be capable of drafting a constitution for tomorrow which restores our fellow citizens' confidence in this tremendous project that is the European adventure.
Mr President, despite what the President of the Republic says about the problems faced, in view of the spectacle at Nice, one must question whether the Union is really and truly prepared for enlargement.
The candidates cannot have been pleased at the sight of the scramble for national power and status among the prime ministers.
Sadly the common cause of Europe was a marginal factor.
For the decisions on Council voting and seats in Parliament a more suitable venue would have been the casino at Cannes rather than the Acropolis at Nice, with Mr Chirac playing the role of chief croupier.
Particularly regrettable was the failure to make reference to the Charter - a failure that will bring legal uncertainty and political frustration.
However, my greatest fear is that Britain, France and Germany will now be able to subvert the delicate balance developed between states of various sizes and between the institutions over several decades.
We will resist this forcefully.
Mr President, Commissioner, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, as far as we are concerned, the outcome of the Nice Summit has not prepared the EU sufficiently for enlargement.
In the twelve candidate countries, people prefer to talk in terms of the unification of Europe.
That is quite revealing.
We, i.e. many European citizens, grew up after the Second World War hoping that a united Europe would be able to play a part in the world some day for the sake of the freedom and welfare of humanity, of its own citizens and peoples.
Yet this seems to be an even more distant dream than we had hoped now that Nice is over.
After all, Nice was primarily an attempt on the part of the Member States to reach a settlement behind closed doors on the Amsterdam leftovers, with the safeguarding of national interests uppermost in their minds.
But what they did not do was endeavour to equip the EU to pursue enlargement.
Quite a number of speakers have made the same point this morning and I wholeheartedly agree with them.
As representative of the parties united in the European Free Alliance, I would like to alert the Commission, but particularly the Council, to the dangers, should the EU wish to be no more than an intergovernmental association.
The States preparing for accession will copy the example of our own Member States' egoism.
The regions and peoples that do not have their own state will also weigh the situation up.
They will work out what they stand to gain in Scotland, Catalonia and Flanders if, instead of playing the federal game, they opt to become a Member State themselves, with a guaranteed Commissioner, guaranteed clout in the Council, and a larger number of seats in the European Parliament than they can hope for at present.
Must we give up the dream of a united Europe?
I think not.
We are obliged to put our hopes in the post Nice process.
We want this to be a real process in which the balance between the institutions of the Union and those of the Member States and the constitutive regions must be defined with respect for the subsidiarity principle.
Mr President, there is a quotation from George Orwell' s book, Animal Farm which, in a way, describes what happened in Nice.
It reads, 'Everyone is equal, but some are more equal than others.'
Translated into what happened in Nice, this could read, 'All EU countries are equal, but it is the large countries which decide' .
What happened in Nice was not only that the European Union' s large Member States set the agenda, but that they also brought about Treaty changes which guarantee them the same power in an enlarged EU.
On the basis of the Treaty of Nice, an enlarged EU will become a Union which is more centralised and in which the small countries pay the whole price of enlargement.
For the Swedish negotiators, it would appear to have been more important to please the large Member States than to fight for our own influence.
Sweden is therefore to be given fewer votes than comparable Member States.
It is hard to see what there is in the Nice decisions which really makes enlargement of the EU any the easier.
The decision-making process in the Council is to become more complicated, at the same time as it is to become more difficult to take decisions.
Nice means more supranationalism and centralism, which are precisely what the EU did not need.
The EU' s real problems are the lack of democracy and grassroots support, but those questions were not dealt with at all at the Nice Summit.
I can also inform this Assembly that the results of a Swedish opinion poll were published today, showing that only 38 per cent of the population want to remain in the European Union.
Mr President, Mr President of the Council, Mr President of the Commission, ladies and gentlemen, we should honour the French Presidency, we should honour President Chirac.
He was at the coalface, he fought and conquered for his vision of Europe - because he did have a vision.
Congratulations too, to President Aznar, who won the 'Bingo' at the Nice Council.
Congratulations to the British, who do not have to thump the table any more because they have found out how to stay close to the leader as we were taught to do by the great Dutch cycling champion, Zoetemelk: they cashed in too.
It is our Parliament and our Commission, Mr Prodi, that lacks vision.
It was our Parliament and our Commission that failed to realise there was a plan to assassinate the Commission: the assassination of the Commission will take place in a few years' time.
A Commission with a commissioner for each Member State sanctions the transfer of all the Commission' s important issues to the Council.
That means the death of the Commission, and our Parliament would rather gnaw on the bones thrown to it at the Cologne Council than confront this fundamental problem: without a supranational Commission, the Europe we want will not come into being.
There will be a Europe of nations, there will be no federal Europe.
This is our last chance.
If we want to get back on the federal track, there is only one solution, Mr Prodi.
It is the election of the Commission President by universal suffrage and powerful legitimacy for the Commission, and unless there is a real alliance on specific aims like those, between the Commission, Parliament and Member States like Belgium - which fought hard during this Council, represented by Mr Verhofstadt - then there will no longer be a federal Europe, there will be the Europe of nations which we have never wanted.
Mr President, the fairly unanimous message from the President-in-Office of the Council, the Commission and heads of government is basically that the Treaty of Nice secures the framework for the unification of Europe.
Some are happier than others about this, but the main message is clear: Europe can now be unified in an enlarged democratic EU which is also close to the people, thanks to the Treaty of Nice.
These messages contain such huge and monstrous distortions of the truth that we have to go back to history' s most famous propagandists in order to find exact comparisons.
For the fact is that what has been decided in Nice is enhanced cooperation, superpower domination, a Charter of Fundamental Rights, military development and the monitoring of democracy.
What has been decided is unnecessary to enlargement, and what is necessary to enlargement has not been decided.
The Treaty of Nice contains a series of quite decisive steps towards an EU of élites, together with corresponding steps away from a Europe of democracies and of the people.
Centralised power and superpower dominance are increasing drastically, as if we had not already had enough of these.
Is this a unification and democratisation of Europe?
No, it is an extension to the power of the élites and, in reality, the unfortunate agenda for Eastern Europe is, of course, subjection.
It is we who decide about the applicant States.
The EU does not negotiate with them.
They are not involved in deciding what the Treaty of Nice will contain, and the EU dictates all the conditions of participation.
Moreover, none - and I repeat, none - of the crucial problems associated with the enlargement project and involving the integration of incompatible social and economic systems are recognised as problems.
The EU and the EU' s policy are not the solution, but the problem.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I have little to say today.
Just under a year ago, you sent Mr Tsatsos and me to attend preparations for this Intergovernmental Conference.
Today I can tell you that our mission was a failure.
Our remit was to help make the European Union more democratic and more capable of action so that it would be ready to cope with the enlargement which we so long for.
It is not more capable of action - on the contrary.
The decision-making mechanism in the Council of Ministers has become far more complicated and the hurdles have been raised.
It will now be much easier to form a blocking minority in the Council of Ministers.
In the decisive areas in which we require qualified majority voting if the European Union is to be capable of action with 27 Member States, we failed dismally.
On several counts we even lost ground.
We have to admit that we have not complied with the principle of Amsterdam from the democratic viewpoint. Where qualified majority voting is enshrined in legislation, we have qualified majority voting.
There are four fundamental areas, including structural policy, Article 133 and two other instances in which the European Parliament has been excluded from policy-making.
In other words, the democratic deficit is now even greater.
Plus, the number of seats in the European Parliament has been laid down against our own wishes and without consulting us.
I find this situation intolerable.
Individual interests have prevailed.
The winners are those who asserted their national interests.
And they have all gone home to celebrate.
No-one claims to have done anything for Europe; on the contrary, everyone is saying: I blocked something to protect my own national interests from the veto.
This method has seen its heyday, this system of a Europe of chancelleries is on its last legs.
We need a transparent, democratic, citizens' Europe if we are to have any chance of developing.
Our method must be a method which allows us to set up an Intergovernmental Conference through a convention at which parliamentarians, not chancelleries have their say if we are to take this continent forward.
For the rest, when it comes to law-making, the future Council of Ministers must be an open, parliamentary organisation in which transparency and scrutiny have their place, because we cannot carry on as we are.
The only consequence which I can draw from all this is that, when it comes to voting on the Treaty of Nice, my vote will be a no vote.
Mr President, in the coming weeks we shall have to carry out a rigorous, in-depth analysis of the conclusions of the Intergovernmental Conference and the fundamental questions which it has thrown up.
I will not go back to the comments of the different speakers regarding the method nor the other subjects such as those covered by Mr Brok just now.
Of the fundamental questions, the first is that the Nice conclusions do not guarantee on an institutional level the necessary continuity and the necessary development of the process of integration into the larger Union which is about to come into being.
Therefore, even though we may not call them leftovers, the issues which were not adequately resolved in Nice will inevitably arise again. I refer to the changeover in qualitatively essential areas to qualified majority voting and to the very procedures for taking majority decisions.
Time will show us which issues we need to return to, whether we like it or not.
The second fundamental issue is political rather than institutional.
The atmosphere of the Nice Council, the lack of openness, as President Prodi said, the blinkered vision characterising the attitudes of the different governments - the narrow-minded defence of national interests or policies - explain, it is sad to say, the root of the problem: a serious loss of the sense of shared European interest, of a common European vision.
Well, the appropriate responses to both the institutional and political fundamental questions, which are our most negative legacy from the Nice Council, must be sought in dialogue, in the evaluation and development process which must be pursued under the title "the future of the Union".
We must reflect seriously on what has happened.
We managed to avoid an open crisis which would have threatened enlargement by coming to a last minute agreement on the Treaty, but we are left with a latent crisis which will have to be dealt with.
Building a unified Europe requires far-sighted vision and coherence.
In response to President Chirac, we are not calling for haste; we are asking not to have to take one step forwards and then one backwards, not to call for promotion of the drafting and proclamation of the Charter when we do not then dare to include it in the Treaty, not to call for the new wording of the Convention to be produced when we then do not even dare to suggest it as a potential post-Nice procedure.
We want the objective of constitutionalisation to be called by its name; we are asking for a response, with a clear, coherent vision of the future of Europe, to the disappointments and fears which are spreading amongst the citizens over the current or future nature of the Union.
Mr Prodi, Commissioner Barnier, this is our task.
We have every confidence that Parliament and the Commission will proceed together in this direction, as they have done throughout this difficult year 2000.
Mr President, the most important result from Nice was that, in spite of everything, there was a treaty, so that a place can now be prepared for the applicant States.
Otherwise, the Summit was neither especially historic nor successful.
On behalf of the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party, I should like to discuss five points in the brief minute I have:
1.
It is not acceptable for the large Member States to employ blackmail tactics against the small countries.
This is contrary to the whole idea of the EU.
2.
It is tragic that no further progress was made on the issue of qualified majority voting.
Now, the EU is to become sluggish and powerless to act, and decision-making is to become more complicated.
3.
Closed and exclusive, the Intergovernmental Conference is an old-fashioned and undemocratic method.
The people must be involved in future.
4.
The forthcoming constitutional debate must lead to simplification, distribution of powers and increased democracy.
The EU must acquire a common constitution.
5.
A new Intergovernmental Conference must not be used as an alibi for postponing enlargement.
Our new colleagues must be allowed to participate in the discussions as new Members on equal conditions.
Mr President, President Chirac has played down the negative reactions of many of the Members to the outcome of Nice, describing them as unrealistic and not pragmatic.
In reality, it is the President who is being unrealistic if he thinks that it will be possible to enlarge the Union with such a Treaty.
In my opinion, it is not more realistic to fight for one's own national prestige than to fight for the efficient functioning of the Union, and I would not say that huge numbers of European citizens came out to follow the naval battle fought by their leaders at Nice.
My feeling is that the French Presidency's most serious error was to run the debate along the lines of a battle of powers between States - a mean, shameless fight over details - rather than as a relevant debate on the Union's policies.
Terrified of jeopardising France's equal voting rights with Germany, the Presidency docilely allowed its proposals to extend qualified majority voting to 40 or so subjects to be knocked down to less than half this number.
Yet even the pro-Europe- States did little to fight for its cause and, in the end, bowed before a disappointing compromise.
As for the European Parliament, only the Commission defended its legitimacy and I therefore thank President Prodi and Commissioner Barnier for this, but they were alone in their endeavours and this was reflected in the final compromise.
We truly hope this will be the last Intergovernmental Conference, considering that the Summit revealed a breakdown in Community solidarity.
The real winners in this Conference were Blair and Aznar, the Euro-sceptics.
It is their Europe, the Europe of the market and the right to veto which has won the battle. Our Europe, the Europe of democracy and a sustainable future, lost.
There is one small ray of light although even that was mortgaged to the hilt by the French Presidency, and that is what is known as the post-Nice process.
However, there are ambiguities which require urgent clarification. First of all, 2004 is too far away: we need to act sooner than that.
We want a democratic process with the objective of a European Constitution to be defined by June and launched at the end of the year: the Charter took 8 months to draw up so a Constitution can be produced in less than 4 years.
This is our next battle. I hope that, this time, the governments will fight with us rather than on the opposing side.
Mr President, we had said that a failure would be preferable to a disappointing conclusion.
In practice, we did not fail completely, but neither did we reach a conclusion.
What came out of the Summit were contradictions and deferrals.
The Charter of Fundamental 0Rights was proclaimed but has not been included in the Treaties and it will therefore not become legally binding immediately.
The need for a European Constitution is greater than ever.
The principle of European military defence was accepted but, for now, its function has not been clearly defined.
That can only be guaranteed by making it autonomous from the United States and moving on from NATO, which is now completely outdated.
The need for a social agenda covering employment, health, education, the environment and rights was mentioned, but nothing concrete was specified, not even the barriers to be overcome or how to overcome them to guarantee justice and freedom.
Finally, enlargement to the east and to the south was planned and promised.
That is all well and good, but the institutional rules to make it operative have not been decided upon with certainty. Individual interests and privileges prevail.
We are even further from achieving the Europe we want after Nice than we were before.
The Council must start to take notice of the European Parliament, leaders must start to take notice of the national parliaments and the national parliaments must start to take notice of the views of their citizens.
Mr President, Nice was, and should have been, a historic date, the kick-off for the new Europe, the Europe of the new century, the great Europe, the Europe of all the Europeans.
And what a fine project, eleven years after the fall of the Berlin Wall!
But for that, we would have needed vision, ambition, endurance, generosity of spirit, audacity.
Alas, alas, alas!
We have long known that the great Europe could not be introduced through the institutions of the little Europe.
We know we should think about Europe differently and we know we need new institutions.
But, without a vision of the future, without knowing how to ask the right questions, we ended up with dithering, horse-trading and, finally, tinkering in Nice.
Before the Nice Summit the French Presidency was saying 'better no agreement than a bad agreement' , and this morning, unless I misunderstood, we were in essence told 'better a bad agreement than no agreement at all' .
Certainly, the Nice agreement opens the way to membership for the candidate countries, but we are advancing down that road in the fog, foot on the brake, certain the European vehicle will not reach its destination in good shape.
So let us forget about Nice now, and think about post-Nice -and you will forgive me if I pin my hopes on the plan for a grand convention advanced by Belgium for its Presidency, because the evidence is there, we must do something new, we must change the method, we must accelerate history: 2004 is too late, it is too far off, it is too dangerous.
Yes, a grand convention including the European institutions, the governments, the parliaments of the Member States and the candidate countries which absolutely must be associated with this common house.
That is my hope.
Mr President, the results of Nice are disappointing, unsatisfactory and petty.
The Union's ability to act on decisive matters has not been improved.
The outcome of the compromises brokered in Nice is not more transparency, it is more cover-up.
The democratic credibility of European policy has not been enhanced; on the contrary, the door has been opened to the insidious intergovernmentalisation of European policy and, by extension, to even greater bureaucratisation.
We shall, of course, have the post-Nice process - that, at least, is a faint light at the end of the tunnel and we must not underestimate it.
Enlargement has given you, has given us all the same task as Monnet and Schuman had fifty years ago: the task of developing a method, structure and vision for the future of Europe.
At that time, this applied to half of Europe; now we must develop it for all of Europe.
Enlargement would be a chance to do so, a chance, Mr President-in-Office, which you missed in Nice.
That is my main criticism of you.
It may well be that Nice prepares the EU for enlargement numerically.
But the historic failing of Nice is that your resolutions are not based on any identifiable vision for a Union of 27 Member States.
It is this spirit, the spirit of Monnet, Schuman and others, which was missing in Nice and which was sorely needed.
Instead, the spirit of Nice clearly amounted to wondering how to block, how to intergovernmentalise, how to be feted at home as the defender of national interests, rather than how to take the European Union forward.
If Monnet, Schuman, Adenauer, de Gasperi et al had acted thus, we would never have had European Communities and, as a result, we would still not have European Union.
President Chirac referred to Heads of Government who point out that public opinion still does not understand or accept more or a different sort of progress.
That may well be.
But that is because, that is mainly because none of the heads of government has the courage to lead and educate public opinion pro-actively, rather than running along behind it.
What is heart-breaking about Europe is that so few of its many leaders are prepared to risk their political career by standing or falling by the unification of Europe.
Mr President, I am one of those who had for some time been placing their hopes in the miracle of Nice: an Intergovernmental Conference, a Summit, a Treaty which would both reorganise the European institutions and further the process of enlargement.
But the miracle did not happen!
The clearest gauges of its limited success are the announcement of another Intergovernmental Conference in 2004 and the quality and import of the subjects at the centre of the post-Nice debate, which range from the distribution of competences within the Union to the value of the Charter of Fundamental Rights.
The miracle failed to materialise in the substance of the decisions on institutional reform.
This failure was due essentially to the defensive tactics of the governments and their powers of veto, not to mention the limited involvement of the European Parliament.
This is a sign of short-sightedness in that, today, Parliament is the only Union body which legitimises the will of the people.
The miracle did not come to pass in terms of the organisation of the shared legacy of the Charter of Fundamental Rights either.
Parliament and the Commission have declared that they would abide by it.
What is preventing the Council from deciding to do the same?
There is just one small satisfaction: enlargement.
Thanks to Nice, the institutional barrier can no longer be invoked.
The winners at Nice, the only winners, were the candidate countries, whose path towards the gates of the European Union is being cleared.
Only those who have always believed in the strategic value of enlargement have a genuine right to rejoice with them.
Mr President, the main aspects of European integration remained unresolved in Nice and will remain so for many years.
However, the national governments' claim to be the constitutional legislator of Europe has finally been laid to rest, as has the hope that the heads of state and government think of themselves as the trustees of the idea of European unification.
No, what they have done is to turn Europe into a bazaar at which nationalistic, national interests are bartered.
Amsterdam and Nice have given us a Europe of imperial rulers, a Europe of national administrations, not a Europe of political unification.
What were they supposed to be doing?
According to Article 1 of the Treaty on European Union, they were supposed to be creating an ever closer political union.
But no, the heads of state and government blocked the idea of European unification.
Back home from Nice, they are priding themselves not on what they have given Europe, but on what they have withheld from Europe.
They are holding the flags of national veto, hindrance and delay high.
This is not the Europe which we have been talking about for decades.
It is a Europe of administrations.
Now it is the turn of the parliaments, now the time has come to show that the purpose of parliaments is to tame the power of governments and ...
(The President cut the speaker off)
Mr President, it was the task of the Nice Summit to develop a Union capable of absorbing twelve new Member States.
A European Union which can function efficiently, transparently and democratically.
After all, the countries from Central and Eastern Europe want a robust Union, a Union capable of taking decisions.
It is to be welcomed that the timetable adopted in Nice, with regard to the accession of the first countries from Central and Eastern Europe, is in line with Parliament' s timetable.
But what is striking is that the Council spent four days in seclusion in Nice giving more attention to its own concerns.
There was no answer to the question as to how the institutions of the European Union could function more effectively in an enlarged Union.
The Council really looked after number one; to be sure, it improved things for the Commission to a certain extent and put a little sweetener Parliament' s way, as befits a father.
But it all compares most unfavourably with the attention the Council gave itself.
Four main problems loom large.
Firstly, institutional imbalance: a great deal for the Council and not much for the Commission and Parliament.
Secondly, national interests have triumphed.
Only the Belgian Head of Government, Mr Verhofstadt, was a notable exception.
Thirdly, a democratic deficit.
Old deficits have not been made good and now new ones have come along.
Fourthly, and finally, the decision-making mechanisms cannot be explained back home.
It all gets very complicated.
When Mr Prodi says there are no more leftovers from Nice, I would make so bold as to doubt his word.
We must introduce qualified majority decision-making for the essential topics, or else the situation will become untenable.
Nice will go down in history as the Summit of lost opportunity, the Summit of lack of leadership in Europe, the Summit of opposition and the Summit in whose wake the people felt even more isolated from the European Union.
Mr President, the purpose of the Intergovernmental Conference was to prepare the European Union so that it would be able to operate after enlargement.
I think the European Parliament is right to base its evaluation on two criteria, namely efficiency and democratisation.
As the European Parliament's representatives, Mr Brok and I fought for both, but without the required results.
We do, of course, admit that some progress was made on both counts. As far as efficiency is concerned, qualified majority voting was introduced in several instances, Parliament was granted the right to litigate in matters of a constitutional nature and the system of reinforced cooperation was made more practicable.
Similarly, a number of positive moves were made as regards the European Commission.
As far as democratisation is concerned, the points worth noting are that codecision has been extended on several counts and the European legislator has been authorised to define the status of European political parties and crucial preventive measures to defend democracy and freedom in the Member States.
Fundamental areas still require unanimity. The decision-making system in the Council may well incorporate the principle of a double majority, but it has become somewhat complicated and has upset the balance between large and small Member States.
Finally, the European Parliament will face a huge dilemma when it comes to make its final appraisal of the Treaty at the beginning of next year due to the clause on post-Nice developments.
This clause adopts the European Parliament's opinion that further development of the European Union will be impossible using the intergovernmental method applied in the past.
This method has had it.
The clause on post-Nice developments, for all its exaggerated and wholly inaccurate eulogy of the Treaty, does give some light at the end of the tunnel, to quote my friend Mr Hänsch.
Given the procedure described, new proposals for the Europe of tomorrow need to be drafted by political and social bodies - mainly the national parliaments and the European Parliament.
Without this clause on post-Nice developments, the European Parliament would, I think, have been unable to accept the Treaty.
With this clause, it is simply a poor treaty.
However, careful thought and consideration are needed before the European Parliament decides to reject it.
Mr President, first I would like to join in with the praises you have heaped upon Mr Brok and Mr Tsatsos.
I think all of us, from our own positions, worked as well as possible with Commissioner Barnier to contribute to this Treaty of Nice.
It is true - I shall paraphrase Mr Bayrou - that I have been sitting here since this morning; first next to the President of the Republic, then by myself, and the criticism has struck me as moderate and friendly, but criticism all the same.
Failure, disarray, skimped treaty, I do not want to summarise everything that has been said.
Anyway, I notice that they reflect a contradiction we all live with.
Europe is our common heritage, but all of us here belong to different nations and different parties, and the criticism of the Treaty of Nice - criticism of the European Union in general - is unfortunately, or perhaps fortunately, utterly contradictory.
Some people want more of this, some people want more of that: some people want more Europe, some people want more social Europe, some people want more liberal Europe, some people want less Europe full stop, and we have had some very fine samples of all that this morning.
Some people want more federalism, some people want less and that is where we have to understand that no one can be completely satisfied.
I think that deep down it is in the nature of a European compromise not to be satisfying.
I am not saying the Treaty of Nice is exactly what we wanted but, to summarise what I think, it is the best possible treaty given the state of our institutions, the state of our vision of Europe and indeed the state of our ideas, and the state of Europe itself.
Like the President of the Republic this morning, I too try to imagine what would happen if we had arrived here without a Treaty of Nice.
The consequences of that for Europe would have been totally incalculable.
I think it would have complicated enlargement and I do see satisfaction amongst the candidate countries.
I think confidence in Europe would have been shaken in economic terms, and operationally we would have lost several years of ground.
The French Presidency takes some satisfaction in having carried out its task, which consisted quite simply of achieving closure three and a half years after Amsterdam and five years after we began to think about institutional reform.
I would just like to take up some of the criticisms, or lessons, I have heard here and there.
First on the reweighting grid which has shocked François Bayrou, for instance, and bothered Pervenche Berès.
We should not forget that this is actually the first time since 1957 that the grid has been genuinely reformed and revised.
We failed in Amsterdam, despite excellent work by the Dutch Presidency.
Here we succeeded, although it is an extremely sensitive and complex issue.
No, we were not playing roulette.
I do not think the President of the Republic has a croupier' s temperament.
We could not make everyone happy, so we tried not to make everyone unhappy.
It was a bit like squaring the circle.
We had a system which was actually simple, but from our point of view - which was not necessarily the Commission' s, and it will perhaps set that out for you - it produced excessive distortions, that is, the principle of the double majority.
We have tried to work on a principle of simple reweighting in this squaring of the circle, and I think that on the whole the result is balanced.
I would say to Mrs Sjöstedt that I sincerely believe the agreement has not been made on the backs of the 'small countries' .
There is real redistribution in their favour, plus guarantees.
For example, in the early days of the European Union, as you know, two so-called 'big' countries could achieve a blocking minority, and today it takes three.
In a Europe with 27 countries, at least one additional Member State will be needed, so no longer three, but four countries will have to join forces for a blocking minority.
Anyway, before Nice we had the opposite situation where the 'big countries' were under-represented and redistribution was needed for them.
In addition during the debate we added two so-called 'safety nets' .
A safety net of Member States: any qualified majority must include a majority of the Member States.
There was a strong demand for that from those calling themselves 'small countries' .
Then, the 21 least populated countries, representing 30% of the population, will have 50.7% of the votes in the Council.
There is also a demographic safety net.
I honestly believe we have a balanced system - though I will not claim that it is simple and straightforward.
Lots of speakers have mentioned the post-Nice process.
Apparently that is an essential subject for Members of the European Parliament, which is not surprising.
We often talked about it here, in October and November.
The Presidency has never denied the importance of reflection - as you know - but do recognise that we had to concentrate on the difficult issues, and before we could have post-Nice, we had to have Nice.
But I do not think we have ever smothered post-Nice, we have been keen to think about it.
Other methods will be needed.
Several people have mentioned it here and besides, you will have noticed that the conclusions on the post-Nice process include wide consultation of all sorts of players in society, including Parliament, and concluding with what we hope will be a short IGC.
But, at the same time - and I say this amicably to Elmar Brok - I do not think the Council can meet under the control of the European Parliament.
Yes, it can be involved, but I am not sure that more control or presence would facilitate matters.
We operate under constitutional systems and the powers must not get confused.
It is difficult.
I belong to a country that invented separation of powers and I think what we sometimes suffer from is insufficient separation of them.
But it is a good system which has stood the test of time.
We need to think in depth about the future - and again I note the same contradictions in passing: those who want a post-Nice review are not necessarily in agreement about its objective.
Take, for example, the debate on the constitution, where some want a federal constitution and others want a constitution based on subsidiarity.
Before agreement is reached, the European Union must continue to operate.
It is a thankless task. It is a painful, difficult task, but it needs to be done.
This reform has been in construction for five years.
The French Presidency has carried it out without self-satisfaction, but with satisfaction in the work done.
Later we will see, together, all together, how to proceed.
The milestones are in place, enlargement is possible, the European Parliament will have its place in the debate and in going deeper into the routes and ideas.
I also want to say to Giorgio Napolitano - who has done a lot of work on this issue - that in the end the atmosphere at Nice, the spirit of the Heads of State and Government, and the spirit of the Commission was not defensive of national interests, but seeking a common direction within those national interests.
One can understand that Heads of State and Government are preoccupied with the sensitivities of their own public opinions and Parliaments.
But I say this sincerely to the European Parliament - we cannot build Europe on the backs of the citizens or behind their backs.
This will be one of my last speeches to you and I would like, in conclusion, to say first what a pleasure it has been to speak here on so many occasions, with the Commission - the President of the Commission - but also to reflect on the role of the European Parliament itself.
This will be the only time and I hope you will not mind.
When you criticise the Nice European Council and the future Treaty of Nice - the criticism, though varied, is unanimous - be aware that you are also addressing all your governments and all the peoples of Europe they legitimately represent, who have also elected you.
I think you should be aware of that because the three institutions, the Commission, the European Parliament and the Council, all represent them, each in their own way: let none consider themselves the sole guardian of the higher European interest, while the others are just traders and shopkeepers.
I believe deeply in the Community method, and when we say Community method we mean balance between three institutions which need to coexist and get on well together.
That is what I will take away from this debate, this Presidency and this Intergovernmental Conference.
The work has been difficult. I am sure it will be useful for the future of Europe.
This is ongoing work, but it cannot continue unless we all work together to uphold the European ideal.
Thank you very much, Minister.
I am sure Parliament will go on to consider the relationship between the institutions.
Mr President, Mr Prodi, Mr Barnier, I would like to speak on two points.
My first point is that, contrary to what Mr Chirac and Mr Prodi have claimed, there are Nice leftovers, not just for the Fifteen but also, even more so, for the Twenty-seven.
In effect, the question is: are we ready for enlargement and what are our objectives?
And not only is the issue of the Commission a leftover, but the lack of extension of qualified majority voting and codecision strengthens competition between the Member States, between the Fifteen and a fortiori between the Twenty-seven, and undermines the future of the European social model.
As regards post-Nice, the following question has to be dealt with: do we want to continue at the same pace as Fifteen, and a fortiori as Twenty-seven?
I do not think that will be possible.
We must lift the consensus rule, including in a future convention.
The European public interest, of which none of us is sole guardian - Mr Moscovici is right about that - cannot be based on the addition of national interests which are growing and becoming neutralised and in that regard Prime Minister Verhofstadt had a salutary message for us all.
Mr President, there is an expression in my language 'to take French leave,' which is what the President-in-Office has done, leaving without saying goodbye.
Therefore, my first words should be to thank Mr Prodi, who has stayed.
The Commission is showing that it is interested in the debate in this Parliament.
As far as the Treaty of Nice is concerned, we can say very little, because we do not yet have the conclusions of the European Council, and therefore, until we see them, we cannot add much.
I think there are two matters in which the European Parliament plays an important role.
The first is the Charter of Fundamental Rights.
The Charter has been proclaimed and that is a good thing.
But it has neither been incorporated into the Treaties, nor has a reference to the Charter been put in Paragraph 2 of Article 6 of the Treaty on European Union.
And, above all, I have the feeling that the proclamation was not a solemn one. It was a proclamation on the quiet.
I would therefore like to thank our President, Mrs Fontaine, and President Prodi for what they have said: for the European Parliament and the Commission, the Charter is law from now onwards, and it is going to have an effect from now onwards.
I think that this is positive.
The other point from Nice on which Parliament will judge Nice is the extension of qualified majority voting and Parliament' s codecision.
On this subject - from what I have been able to hear here this morning - the news is vague and does not seem to be very promising.
We will have to wait before we can establish what Parliament' s opinion is.
I remember that when Dimitris Tsatsos and I drew up the report on the Treaty of Amsterdam, we talked about Ortega y Gasset, who said, quoting old Cervantes, that often you have to choose between staying at an inn or continuing with the journey.
Nice is the road to two important things, one of which is enlargement.
Enlargement is going to take place - now we know it.
This is also the case for the euro.
I think that a collapse at Nice would have been a punch below the belt for the euro.
Therefore, perhaps in this Parliament we are in a paradoxical situation that is completely different to Amsterdam.
Perhaps, for this Parliament the European Council of Nice has not been positive, as it was in Amsterdam.
But perhaps, for the European Union, the European Council of Nice is opening up the way for hope and for the future.
We will see, Mr President, when we read the conclusions.
Until then, the Group of the European People' s Party (Christian Democrats) and European Democrats reserves judgement on what its position will be.
Mr President, after the Single European Act, after Maastricht, after the Treaty of Amsterdam, this Parliament had to judge the results.
In all those cases we reached the conclusion that those treaties were not entirely satisfactory, did not respond to all of our aspirations, but nonetheless represented a step forward and were at least better than the status quo.
We recommended that they be ratified.
This time we have a treaty which, at least on one point, represents a step backwards and is arguably worse than the status quo: that is, the new system for qualified majority voting in the Council, which makes reaching a decision even more difficult than it is at present.
It introduces a triple threshold: number of states, population, and the percentage of the votes set at a higher level than is the case at the moment.
At the moment it is 71% of the votes.
That is already very high.
It was set high to make sure that under any permutation such a qualified majority represented a majority of the population.
Now that we have a population criterion in there anyway, it should have been possible to lower the threshold in terms of the number of votes.
Instead it seems that it has been raised, although I speak while waiting to see the final text: apparently there was an adjustment in the last hour of the IGC on that.
I will evaluate that outcome when I see the text.
Nonetheless that is a very worrying situation.
For the rest the Treaty is a mixture of unsatisfactory and positive things - unsatisfactory but nonetheless better than the status quo, I suppose, at least as regards the extension of qualified majority voting, the extension of the codecision procedure for the European Parliament, and the provisions for enhanced cooperation.
That is all better than we have now, even if not all of our requests and desires have been met.
Finally, there are a few positive things: the new version of Article 7 of the Treaty; the article on political parties and their statute; the right of this Parliament to take the other institutions to the Court of Justice - that is also an important factor of political control; the new formula for the European Commission, putting the so-called "lex Prodi" into the Treaty, strengthening the President and the new composition of the Commission - a reasonable compromise which I accept and will work over time; and, as my colleague, Mr Tsatsos pointed out, the way forward to the future.
This is not the end of the story.
New reforms will come and we must take advantage of that.
To sum up, we have a mixture of the good, the bad and the ugly.
We will now evaluate this in detail.
I believe we will recommend ratification and moving forward to a new reform, but we must look at the small print to decide whether that is the right way forward.
Mr President, I apologise because my remarks are slightly ill-prepared.
I have come straight from a meeting and, because there are no televisions in the meeting rooms in this building, it is very difficult to keep in touch with what is happening in the Chamber, a deficiency which I hope will be corrected in due course.
Many of us regard the Treaty of Nice as unacceptable but for many different reasons.
The great difficulty concerning the Treaty of Nice - as many people have already commented - is that the lack of any text at this time makes it impossible to make a considered judgment.
We do not know whether the carpentry shop in Nice has produced a Pandora's box for Commission activism or a coffin for democracy, but - whatever has emerged - it is being French-polished and we hope the final result helps the European Union.
I believe that two failures are the lack of democracy, because the opportunity to open the Council up to public scrutiny has been ignored although many of us feel that this was the time to do it, and the illogicality of the re-weighting of votes, with one approach for the Council and another for the European Parliament.
Many people looking at the Treaty of Nice will wonder why it was done in that way.
I personally believe that the re-weighting of votes must take account of population, as is done in the European Parliament and should have been done in the Council also.
A further reason for opposing the Treaty of Nice is the development of greater bureaucracy in the European Union.
Who can genuinely argue that the thirty areas now under QMV are essential to the enlargement process?
I think most of the enlargement countries - while accepting the Treaty as it stands because it exists and opens the door to their accession in due course, sooner rather than later I hope - will look at those points and, like most of us, realise that they have no relevance to the day-to-day affairs of their lives.
No reform of the common agricultural policy, no reform of the development policies which are vastly wasteful.
Then there is the incorporation as a mandatory mechanism of the Charter of Fundamental Rights: in itself as in the United States today, a recipe for confusion between the courts in the European Union.
There is the fact that under enhanced cooperation the European Parliament has no role, although certain leaders of national parties - including the leader of the Labour Party in his Warsaw speech - promised no reform of the structural funds in real terms until 2013.
This is not a recipe for enlargement, it is a recipe for more bureaucracy, less democracy.
Mr President, we have already made a thorough assessment of what happened in Nice, but we should remember that Nice began with a very restricted agenda.
The Council asked this Parliament not to broaden the agenda because the intention was to concentrate exclusively on the Amsterdam leftovers. The Council said it wanted to do this in order to make the European Union's institutions operationally efficient so that it could work better with 27 Member States than it does today with 15.
What was the result of this exercise and this work?
The result was, in fact, that the most fundamental and important factor for introducing operational efficiency, decisiveness, flexibility and workability into institution operations was not dealt with at all.
What the Council concentrated on most were questions of power; in other words in Nice there were too many calculators and not enough policies.
The images coming out of Nice showed a Europe in which every country was trying to look after itself, suggesting that the Europe of the future will be a battle between the large and small countries.
I wonder whether these might not be arguments that better serve the interests of the Euro-sceptics and Europe' s enemies.
I wonder whether this image we have been given of Nice might not be an appeal to the conscience of convinced Europeans, those who do not just want a single market, those who do not just want a single currency, in the face of what I regard as this "non-time" for Europe.
In my view, Nice was the second part of Amsterdam and we are now in a phase, an interval, between Amsterdam and an IGC to be held in 2004 but with an unknown end-date.
Right now it is the duty of convinced pro-Europeans to counter the image that came out of Nice and say that solidarity for us has a meaning and that it is possible to build a Europe in which large and small countries can coexist peacefully; in other words, there are no expendable countries in this European project and national egos are nonsense in this Europe.
So I should now like to appeal to the House and the Commission: somebody has to put the case for this European project.
The case for the European project is that it is not the sum of national interests but a joint project, as President Romano Prodi has said, and the institutions must now look to the future and join hands so that enlargement can take place, so that the citizens can look on Europe as we would like them to and so that politics can go back to building the European project rather than just upholding power, particularly the power of the larger countries.
Mr President, it has been said, and I think rightly so, that Europe is born out of necessity and that only when necessity knocks at the door does Europe decide to take a step forward.
And necessity gave an urgent knock at the door of Europe in Nice, in the form of sclerosis as a result of the prospect of an enlarged Europe.
There can be many evaluations of what happened in Nice, and we have had ample proof of that this morning and this afternoon in the continuation of the debate.
But the European Council in Nice, like many other summits in the history of the European Union, represents a triumph for reality, a triumph of pragmatism over utopianism.
Although we would all have liked to increase our powers in codecision - and despite the disputes between large countries, between large and small countries and between small and medium-sized countries - it is obvious that the following, although not spectacular, are all steps in the right direction, as President Prodi said this morning: a Commission whose president has his powers increased; a decision-making process in which more decisions - not all those that we would have wished - are taken by qualified majority; a clarification of the role of enhanced cooperation; and also - why not come out with it? - a reweighting, imperfect though it may be, of the votes in the Council of Ministers.
But Nice, Mr President, is not the end of the road, but the starting point for a new phase with many challenges.
We have to successfully complete accession, consolidate the internal market, deliver the single currency, develop a real common foreign and security policy and open up a new debate on the future of Europe.
These are challenges that cannot be overcome, Mr President of the Commission, with our backs to the people.
And in order to do this we will need more generosity, more realism, a greater involvement of the institutions that defend the Community interests, and in this type of conference, everyone will need to seek, as Jean Monnet said, and I will finish with this, their interest in the common interest.
Mr President, Mr President of the Commission, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, there are winners and losers, but Europe cannot claim to be one of the winners and democracy and transparency certainly cannot.
That is, in fact, the gist of what President Prodi said today in a commendably clear and unequivocal manner.
Let us take one thing at a time: the charter was not included in the Treaty, not so much as a mention.
Progress was made on security and defence policy, it is true, but it has no parliamentary dimension.
As far as qualified majority voting is concerned, it has only been extended slightly and the procedure is now even more complicated and less transparent than before.
We do, of course, have reinforced cooperation, but how it will work remains to be seen.
The ratio between large and small was, in the end, regulated in a perfectly reasonable manner, following a number of totally obtuse and unacceptable suggestions, and the Commission has been strengthened, even if the link with the number of members is not necessarily an overly reasonable or clever decision.
Mr Moscovici is without doubt quite right to say that talking about it among ourselves is not enough; we must tell the people about it.
It is true that the people are probably more critical of integration more often than we here in the Chamber.
And with a better result, we would probably have had more trouble persuading the people, but then again we would have had more persuasive powers had we been able to bring a better result home from Nice.
We would have been able to convey a better, stronger European result to the people with a better and clearer conscience.
I should therefore like to come back to something which has been touched on a few times today already.
Yes, we need to analyse the result.
But I think that we should not do so until we have a clear and unequivocal promise from the Council as to how the process will operate from now on, i.e. with the close involvement of the European Parliament.
What was found and said in Nice is too vague for me: yes to Parliament's involvement.
What involvement?
I think it is a disgrace if we have to fight yet again for perhaps two representatives to attend as many meetings as possible.
It is totally unacceptable.
This Parliament must play a leading role in this process, just as it did at the convention.
We want to prove to the heads of government that we know best.
If we compare the convention with what happened at the Intergovernmental Conference, admittedly with less serious problems than at the Intergovernmental Conference and with fewer national interests than at the Intergovernmental Conference, then the convention and the modus operandi and methods of the convention clearly come out on top.
I therefore take the view that we should only apply ourselves in detail to what has come out of Nice once it is clear that the European Parliament will have an important and decisive role in the future process.
We want to prove to the heads of government that we know best.
Mr President, Mr President of the Commission, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, all my colleagues have stressed the expectations that surrounded the Nice Summit, which was intended to allow the European Union to continue operating effectively, democratically and transparently after the historic enlargement we are awaiting.
Certainly, the Nice Summit has made it possible to achieve significant progress on all the issues that directly affect the lives of our citizens, whether it be the preservation of health, the protection of the environment, social policy or indeed the adoption of a European Company Statute.
Another positive point is that the Charter of Fundamental Rights has been officially proclaimed, even if it is not intended to be binding at this stage.
Finally, the decisions taken in the area of the common foreign and security policy represent undeniable progress.
This summit would have been a triumph if the crucial revision of the Treaties had been crowned with as much success as the areas I have just mentioned.
In fact, while we seem to have succeeded in avoiding total paralysis of the future enlarged European Union, it has not been possible to convert the ambitions of the French Presidency into a new draft of the Treaty.
Be it the excessively limited number of areas transferred from unanimity to majority voting, or subject to codecision, be it the upward revision of the number of Members of the European Parliament in the Europe of tomorrow, or yet again, be it the uncertainty over the number of Commissioners after the enlargements, the Treaty does not come up to scratch, far from it.
Beyond the technical aspects of that reform, what concerns us most of all is the growing difficulty the Member States of the European Union have in making joint decisions, in accordance with the common interests of their citizens.
Let me conclude, as rapporteur for the outermost regions of the Union, by expressing deep regret at the rather disappointing conclusions of the Nice Summit, which do no more than acknowledge the Commission' s work programme.
The outermost regions deserve better and Parliament will continue to work flat out - with Commissioner Barnier' s help, I am sure - to give them all the space they are entitled to within the Union.
Mr President, Nice was no success.
Notwithstanding all the self-congratulation by the French government this morning, the IGC simply did not finish on a good note.
Admittedly, reinforced cooperation and the European defence force got off the ground, the English having imposed quite a few restrictions on the latter.
The most essential issue, i.e. the switch from vetos to majority decisions, was not applied to the very areas where it was most needed.
Taxation, social security, justice, asylum issues, agriculture, structural funds; the very areas that ought to have been provided for before enlargement, were left out.
The Summit simply failed on that score.
National interests took precedence over the interests of Europe as a whole.
And what makes it more serious still is that in a number of cases where majority decision making was introduced, no provision was made for Parliament to have authority as colegislator.
So the democratic deficit has grown a little larger.
What possessed the Summit to have so little feeling for democracy?
Then there is the position taken up by the Netherlands.
During the Summit it seemed as if the Netherlands was only out to win a kind of football match against Belgium.
The result of this outpouring of energy was 12-13 instead of 10-10 in terms of points in the vote weighting.
What is that against 300 votes?
Anyway, why was France so dead against counting in population density?
Surely it is a very common democratic principle?
So the Netherlands got one more vote than Belgium in the Council.
But if we look at the number of seats in the European Parliament then the Netherlands drops from 31 to 25 and Belgium from 24 to 22.
So the Netherlands paid a price for gaining a toehold in the Council.
At the end of the day, it is clear that the traditional IGC format no longer works.
When the time comes to make preparations once again for a summit in 2004, it would be better to use the convention format.
Leave it to the 15 governmental representatives, 30 national and 15 MEPs to prepare for the IGC.
It worked well for the Charter and it will also work better than a traditional IGC.
And it is more democratic to boot.
Mr President, as far as I am concerned, the Nice Summit simply failed to make the grade.
Mr President, according to a press report, the initial comment by the Finnish Prime Minister, Paavo Lipponen, after Nice was: "This agreement must be remade" .
We must surely agree with him, although we know that this desire will only be able to be realised after many years have passed, if, as I believe will happen, national parliaments ratify the Treaty of Nice.
Hopefully, however, Nice showed Finland and other small countries that emphasising the intergovernmental European nature of the Council' s role will mean a continuous cycle of defeats for small countries in decision making.
No one at the meeting spoke for Europe.
When the Commission then tried to do so, its President, as we saw, was literally thrown out of the door. I would like to say many thanks anyway for the gesture
It is nonetheless sad for the future of Europe that no European statesmen were in evidence.
Almost every country brought its own internal political problems to the meeting.
When they got back home, the prime ministers then emphatically pointed out how they had achieved victory with regard to these internal problems.
"We were able to keep matters under our own control" or "We were able to block European decisions" , they said in their own countries.
The candidate countries were thus presented with a very bad example, which must have astonished the whole region, from Tallinn to Prague and Budapest.
It is obviously a positive matter that enlargement can now go ahead.
That message must be clearly sent to the candidate countries.
After enlargement, meetings like Nice and the IGCs as they are at present will be impossible; integration will either really make headway or simply fall apart.
Things cannot stay as they are now.
It is to be hoped that Europe will yield statesmen. The difference between politicians and statesmen is that politicians know well enough what people want today, while statesmen know what they will actually want twenty years from now.
Mr President, Mr President of the Commission, ladies and gentlemen, I am not one of those clever members who can already weigh up everything decided in Nice in detail, because I have yet to see the texts.
But if we have learned and must learn anything from Nice, then it is that Europe is far too valuable to leave it solely in the hands of the Heads of State and Government.
The model of the Intergovernmental Conference has had its day.
That is the first and most important lesson to be learned from last week's negotiations.
On the positive side, we have managed to break through the power boundaries.
This is an old demand which we Bavarians have made time and again and for which we were ridiculed years ago; now it is the basis for Council resolutions.
I see this as a huge success.
But when I look at the wrangling which took place in Nice, it would perhaps have been more important to start discussing power boundaries straight away.
That might have made it easier to find reasonable compromises here.
In theory, the Amsterdam leftovers have been dealt with.
In practice, however, compromises have been found on the basis of the lowest common denominator.
Europe cannot be operated in the long term by working solely to the lowest common denominator.
I only hope that Parliament will learn the right lessons from all this.
This Parliament must become more self-confident, especially when dealing with the Council of Ministers, if we want to prevent bureaucracy and secret diplomacy from taking over Europe permanently.
Mr President, it is not easy to criticise the French presidency during this debate as it is not present.
I understand that President Chirac, Mr Vedrine and Mr Moscovici have other important meetings to attend. However, I am sure that the President of the European Commission, Mr Prodi, has important meetings to attend as has Commissioner Barnier and yet they have done us the courtesy to wait for the end of this debate.
Mr Moscovici says we should not blame him, we should blame other governments at the Council.
It is deplorable that he has not found it possible to find a deputy to wait for the end of our deliberations.
We are after all hoping that we shall be joined by applicant countries from Central and Eastern Europe who have been used to the arrogance of government and people not being present, to people giving speeches and then disappearing.
I deplore the fact that Mr Moscovici has found no deputy.
Has Nice been a success?
Mr Moscovici says that we must turn to our own national governments and criticise them.
I am happy to do that.
Mr Blair returned to Great Britain as a conquering hero because he had not surrendered this, had not surrendered that and had fought for Britain's interests.
Well, of course, I support him in that but what has he actually achieved?
He tells us that he has ensured that enlargement will take place.
I do not know whether the Commission will reply at the end of this debate but I wonder, in the absence of the Council, whether the Commission is equally confident that by 2004 this European Parliament will contain Czech, Hungarian and Polish Members of the European Parliament and Members from the Baltic States.
Mr Moscovici says that of course you must temper your idealism with realism.
I just ask him: Did General de Gaulle temper his idealism with realism, or Winston Churchill?
"Public opinion will not wear this."
"We cannot get this through the House of Commons."
"Oh, there is a referendum."
Is there?
Have we no leadership in the European Union?
Where is the Council?
Where are the governments?
It is deplorable and the only hopeful sign is that the European Commission has clearly recovered its sense of self-confidence.
This European Parliament will join with the European Commission in insisting that our demands are met.
Mr President, the Nice Summit has shown that Intergovernmental Conferences have reached the end of their useful life.
We are on the eve of eastward enlargement, a turning point which is throwing the strategy of doing things step by step into crisis.
If a response is not found to the democratic deficit of the European institutions, the Union will not be able to count on the support of the peoples.
The list of problems tackled in Nice is long but, as President Prodi made quite clear, there was insufficient focus on the institutional reforms and the role of Parliament.
It may be that we went to Nice with too many ambitions.
Parliament's ambition does not, however, mean that it lacks a sense of responsibility.
If we gave in to the realists, we would sweep the Charter of Fundamental Rights under the carpet and be content with a free trade area governed by the large corporations and national interests. Something is wrong.
The young federalists who called upon the heads of government to be more courageous, to have the courage of the fathers of the European Community, have understood this.
We need to set in motion a large-scale debate on the future of Europe: this must be the post-Nice process if we want to revitalise Europeanism in a profoundly different environment.
Mr President, I will be very brief because the purpose of my speech is to thank you, to thank you not only for your kindness to us but also for what you have said.
It is not courtesy which has prompted us to stay until the end of the debate, Mr Beazley: Commissioner Barnier and myself have stayed to hear your opinions, your convictions and your feelings, for it is my opinion that, if we are to build Europe, Parliament and the Commission must do so together.
We have been quite frank with each other in today's debate about those parts of the Treaty of Nice which give us cause for satisfaction and even more open about those with which we are not content. Our reasons are different in some cases but we share the same feelings and concerns.
We have made no bones about the need to continue with the same force and the same determination as before Nice, to achieve our objectives along the road to enlargement, which will be our greatest historical moment and which it is the responsibility of Parliament and the Commission to bring about in the coming years.
We have also been completely clear, ladies and gentlemen, about the need for Parliament and the Commission to work together to build the new Europe, for this arduous task is our responsibility, but ours is also this great mission and this great potential.
Thank you very much, Mr President of the Commission.
I have received six motions for resolutions from the Members, tabled in accordance with Paragraph 2 of Rule 37 of the Rules of Procedure.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place on Thursday at 10.00 a.m.
2001 budget (continuation)
In accordance with the agenda, we will resume the debate on the 2001 budget.
Mr Wurtz has the floor.
Mr President, at first reading, my group performed the symbolic political act of tabling a resolution rejecting the budget.
We wanted to draw attention to the characteristics, unacceptable in our view, of the draft submitted to us at that time.
We stood by the principle that there should be new appropriations for new policies.
Instead of the intended redeployments, detrimental to the traditional priorities, we called for the multi-annual revision of the financial perspective, especially for external actions, although a similar problem arises for expenditure on employment and environmental protection.
We decided - and we make no bones about it - that we did not want the Council putting us in a position tomorrow where we have to choose between two priorities that are equally legitimate in our eyes: the Balkans and the Mediterranean.
We are now in precisely the situation we wanted to avoid.
Under the terms of the compromise concluded between Parliament' s delegation and the Council, Euro-Mediterranean cooperation suffers a cut of EUR 200 million compared with the budget for 2000.
A fine signal to send our close partners in the South.
As for the Balkans, they have given rise to an arduous and very precarious financial set-up.
This includes a transfer, to the 2001 budget, of 2000 budget appropriations for aid to Latin America, or appropriations for Morocco under the draft fisheries agreement and not used this year.
In addition, and above all, the problem of financing for the Balkans will still be there in its entirety for the years ahead.
Heading 3, internal actions, also warrants a comment, since the 'employment initiative' , re-baptised the 'Spirit of Enterprise programme' has been amputated to the tune of EUR 87 million, the Trans-European Networks by EUR 23 million, and environmental protection by EUR 42 million.
In total, with about 1.09% of European gross domestic product, or even less, the 2001 budget will be one of the lowest of the last ten years, in relative terms, since it is well below the already very restrictive ceiling established under Agenda 2000 in Berlin in March 1999.
That is why the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left unfortunately cannot support Mrs Haug' s report.
Mr President, I would like to start by stressing the fact that this year's budget is due in particular to the work of all the Members of the committee itself, in addition, of course, to the work of the committee chairman, Mr Wynn, who has steered us with wisdom through the various situations, and tense moments which we have experienced.
I would also like to thank Commissioner Schreyer.
However, this does not mean that we could have done more or better.
I will focus on one aspect at a time.
Firstly, the positive side: the approximately EUR 60 million of agricultural funds allocated for testing, which is a significant although, in my opinion, not conclusive step; the earmarking of around EUR 450 million for small and medium-sized businesses, for we have at last realised that the European economy is not based on multinationals but on small and medium-sized enterprises, which will give new impetus to development and employment; then the fact that the increase in expenditure is only 3.5%, and the increase in appropriations for the Balkans, which is of political importance.
In this sense, our committee has made a fundamental achievement.
I would now like to focus on two points which I feel require some attention and give cause for concern: firstly, the possibly excessive use of flexibility which, like all excessive things, is a negative factor, which means that we must not use it as a safety net; secondly, the fact that the creation of the new jobs is simply due to early retirements.
This must not become a precedent in our institutions.
Finally, I urge the committee to adopt increasingly a budgetary strategy aimed particularly at strengthening and protecting our currency, the euro.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, and I would have said Madam President of the Council, but I do not see her among us.
It is true that the Chamber is pretty thin, but unfortunately the debate on the budget lasted longer than planned and we - I and the speakers who follow me - will not have the opportunity to raise the matter with the Presidency.
I, in my turn, would like to congratulate the rapporteurs, the chairman of the Committee on Budgets, the Council and the Presidency on the work that has been accomplished, and the conclusion of this agreement which will allow us to vote for the budget for the year 2001.
But I endorse all the comments made, especially by Mr Colom i Naval, on this extremely delicate issue of the financial perspectives.
An agreement has just been concluded in Nice to make enlargement possible.
Now, the previous enlargements gave rise to major financial allocations.
The Member States were not afraid of public opinion at home then and the enlargement to Spain and Portugal was accompanied by a major mobilisation of resources.
When I see that our budget is down by comparison with the year 2000, both in real terms and in terms of percent of GNP, and that we are so very far adrift from the objectives set in Edinburgh, I recognise that as the real problem.
Refusing to harness ourselves to them means undermining the credibility of the construction and enlargement of the Union.
Mr President, in the course of the budgetary procedure for the 2001 budget, the debates in this Parliament focussed on a limited number of issues.
One of these issues was, and still is today, the increase in the financial perspective for foreign policy.
The Council is right to reject this revision because there is no point in putting a ceiling on the expenditure in Berlin for a period of six years if these ceilings are going to be called into question every year.
These maximum levels force the Commission to set priorities within the confines of a budget, in the way that every government has to.
Another issue to be given an airing once again this year was the flexibility instrument.
An instrument of EUR 200 million that has now been earmarked, in agreement with the Council, for aid to the Balkans.
As Mr Colom i Naval rightly commented, using the flexibility instrument in this way misses the whole point, i.e. the assuaging of unforeseen budgetary need.
To be perfectly honest, I do wonder whether he would have said the same if this instrument had been used in the same spurious way for MEDA, as proposed by Parliament.
It so happens that I voiced this criticism during the first reading of the budget, and I do not recall anybody applauding it.
Needless to say, I am not against giving aid to the Balkans.
The Union as an association of nation States, born of the need for peace in Europe, has a duty of honour to finance the process of peace and reconciliation in the Balkans.
However, I feel that when it comes to mounting such an extensive operation, we must take stock of the need for aid before opening our wallet.
The zeal shown by the Commission and Parliament to equip the Balkans with aid reserves, contrast sharply with the cuts in aid for the candidate States.
Mr President, we probably ought to reserve the flexibility instrument for the 2002 budget now for the candidate states.
They might wish to join the EU earlier, completely out of the blue.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the principles of thrift and social and economic balance have been taken into account in drawing up the budget and the rapporteur must be thanked for that.
It is also good that, as the main source of employment, small and medium-sized enterprises have been allocated additional funds.
This will help to create new jobs and continue the fight against unemployment.
We are also aware of the assumption behind the Commission's Letter of Amendment No. 2, i.e. that around 900 million can be saved in Category I. However, this assumption no longer holds true.
First, the euro has now gone up in value, thereby reducing any potential savings, and secondly, we must now assume that insufficient funds have been earmarked in the budget for dealing with the BSE crisis.
We shall therefore be forced to accept a supplementary budget which will again seriously reduce, if not eliminate any potential savings in this category.
Mr President, Commissioner, I should like to begin by congratulating our colleague, the general rapporteur Jutta Haug, on the way in which she has done her job, which has contributed immensely to the constructive atmosphere in which our work has been carried out in committee and in Parliament in general.
The vote that is to follow this debate will mark the end of the long, complex process of approving the European Union budget for 2001.
As a result of intense negotiations and successive compromises among the various institutions, the chances of its approval are reasonable.
However, I should like to point out certain aspects that carry over to subsequent years.
The budget represents, in payment appropriations, just 1.056% of the Community GDP.
The financial perspective forecast 1.11% for 2001, which is not to mention the 1.27% that was being mentioned a few years ago.
On the other hand, external cooperation programmes are still not multiannual, the difference between commitments and payments is still growing, some projects are still implemented very little or badly, there are unjustifiable and unsustainable payment delays, and Parliament has been confronted with faits accomplis with budgetary implications.
Whereas there is no solution as yet for the first aspect mentioned, the GDP, and I am sure that Parliament will soon demonstrate its persistence with regard to the second, I must say that with regard to the third aspect that I have highlighted, I believe that the great novelty in the budget process in coming years is the agreement reached between Parliament and the Council for the Commission to draw up a report by 30 June 2001 to be submitted to the first two institutions regarding the progress achieved in a number of basic fields, such as the reduction in the amount outstanding, the simplification of the project round, improved programme implementation, a commitology review, the reform of the Commission, the definition and execution of implementation objectives, particularly in external cooperation, and the provision of more thorough information for Parliament in several fields.
If the submission of such a report is not seen as just one more formality, the hopes that many of us have placed in this new step will be justified.
Mr President, at times we have sounded like a mutual admiration society in the way in which we have congratulated one another on this.
I may just deviate from that trend slightly in relation to the Council - not necessarily the French Presidency - but the Council in general.
Let us not kid ourselves, this is a good budget.
It is not the budget that I or many of my colleagues would have wanted. However, we can be satisfied with it.
In football terms it is like a l-1 draw.
However, because of the flexibility instrument, we think we have won the penalty shoot-out.
The Commission's original proposal for a revision of the financial perspective to take EUR 300 million from category 1 for category 4 was a worthy idea: worthy of support and eminently sensible.
Unfortunately, a majority of my colleagues did not agree with me and therefore we could not go along with it.
Neither was there a qualified majority within this House to revert to Article 272.
Therefore, we had to find a solution within the means that the interinstitutional agreement affords us so that we could get a decent budget.
That is what we have done: we have avoided a budgetary crisis by going to Article 272; the financial perspective has been maintained, even though we have used the flexibility instrument.
The result is the best that we can hope for without either a revision or Article 272.
Mr Colom i Naval made his remarks this morning because it was clear to those of us who were present when the IIA was agreed that the flexibility instrument should not be used for the same purposes in consecutive years.
I admire the answer Mrs Parly gave this morning but we have turned a blind eye to that.
Kosovo and Serbia are in effect the same thing.
We have ignored what we agreed.
We have also said that the flexibility instrument would not be an annual reserve for category 4 but that is exactly what it has become.
That is why it is not only Mr Colom i Naval who is frustrated at the way things have developed over this budgetary procedure in the last two years.
It must be said, and I put it on record, that the French presidency has been a good partner in trying to find solutions.
On classification, I have no problem with the two points that were raised: pensions are compulsory expenditure.
What we are talking about is an early-retirement scheme which as yet has no legal base; no one knows whether what will be proposed is compulsory or non-compulsory and it is, after all, a p.m. that is on the line.
On the fisheries agreement, we have only changed the remarks for the A lines.
In other words, the remarks which concern non-compulsory expenditure.
In both cases we have not changed any figures.
There should not be a clash on that.
Just because we have a budget and we have agreed a deal at conciliation, let us not imagine that all our problems have disappeared.
The problems will remain until we sort out what we are going to do about external expenditure.
There are times when I foolishly assumed this year that once the Commission had made its proposals for a revision we could reach an agreement with the Council.
I was wrong.
Then when I discovered that there would be no discussions on that revision regarding Article 25 of the IIA, I was, to say the least, somewhat disappointed.
The Council's attitude in this game of football seems to be not to worry about the ball but to get on with the game.
Let me just say to the Council that, as far as this game is concerned, we have not run out of balls and this side intends playing until we get the right result.
Finally, I thank all those who have been involved in this - not just the rapporteurs - but also the secretariat of the Commission, Parliament services and the political group staff.
Mr President, firstly, I too would like to thank all those who contributed to the determination of the budget, the Commissioner, the Council and the rapporteurs.
I would also particularly like to thank Mr Wynn, who, I believe is seeing out his first full year as chairman of the Committee on Budgets during a budgetary procedure, and I think he has made an outstanding job of it.
I am satisfied with this budget.
I am particularly satisfied because we stayed within the financial perspective again.
I believe Parliament must uphold its agreements, and they can only be broken in cases of extreme need.
I have not identified any such cases this year.
The Commissioner is still proud of this and says that the agricultural expenditure will increase by an enormous percentage this year as compared with previous years.
That is indeed the case but then these are agreements that must be kept.
They were concluded before she became Commissioner and I think it would be to her credit if she were to uphold the Berlin agreements.
What else has a bearing on the agricultural budget?
We are all familiar with the content of the letter of amendment in October and if all goes well, if the dollar stays at 91 cents, then we could end up with a surplus of approximately EUR 1.3 billion in category 1A.
Suppose that does not happen and Mr Duisenberg says it is not going to happen, how are we to finance the BSE crisis?
That is what I want to know.
Are we going to make cuts in other agricultural expenditure, are we going to defer it to other years, is it still possible to use the surplus for 2000 or can we devise an insurance system, which already features in an earlier parliamentary resolution?
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, Commissioner, representative of the Council, rapporteurs, each budgetary year the European Parliament gains budgetary importance.
We do not gain this importance out of nowhere, but from the Treaties, although sometimes the Council finds it hard to admit it.
Last year, with the Bourlanges report, the flexibility instrument was mobilised for the first time, and an institutional declaration was also obtained recognising the possible financial insufficiency of category 4.
This year, the Haug report has taken advantage of this institutional declaration last year to discuss the need to revise the financial perspective.
It has been demonstrated that it was not the right time for a revision, that there was enough margin to fulfil the commitments to the Balkans and to the MEDA programme without altering the forecasts of Berlin 1999, and it has been shown that the compulsion to have a revision is only in the intentions of those who voted against Agenda 2000 in its day.
However, the European Parliament cannot carry on forever reducing its external commitments.
This year the flexibility instrument has been used again, but we should not continue down this road.
We do not want there to be a proposal for revision for next year in the Colom Resolution, because we want to wait for the World Bank evaluation, but we share his criticism that this method of resolving the financial insufficiency in category 4 distorts the multiannual nature of the major external objectives of the Union and the very definition of the financial perspective.
This time, more than ever, the secret of success will be in correctly implementing the budget.
Mr President, Commissioner, I must first congratulate the general rapporteur, Mrs Haug, the President of the Commission and my colleagues who have been involved in negotiations on the excellent work that they have done.
The final outcome of the negotiations is positive, which shows that in order to achieve some objectives, what matters is not getting there alone and early, but getting there altogether and on time.
We wanted a budget that would combine our efforts with those of the Member States to contribute to economic growth and increasing employment, and therefore the agreement that has been reached on the multiannual amount for the small businesses programme is a good thing.
However, sustaining this and Parliament' s other political priorities needs to be compatible with budgetary stability in spending.
It is true that the Union is in its most favourable economic situation for 10 years, as is proved by the fact that the net balances have improved a great deal.
But, precisely for this reason, I think that the agreement reached on payment appropriations is reasonable, because it combines efforts in the right direction for sustained growth.
Parliament' s budgetary strategy marks a before and an after at this start of the millennium.
Because the negotiations not only lead to the final amounts and their distribution, but also to the implementation of instruments which are going to enable us to measure to what extent the political will of this Parliament translates into facts.
And I am going a little further, because it is not enough to have strict and transparent rules for implementing the budget, such as the cancellation of commitments if they have not been implemented after two years.
This should go hand in hand with a commitment from the College of Commissioners to a fair and efficient distribution of human and material resources for the management of the various policies, that is, they must remember the political priority of Parliament and the management priority of the Commission.
Mr President, now that we have arrived at the final decision on the EU' s Budget for 2001, we can say that we have come through a year of constant struggle to produce the Budget successfully within the framework devised when the financial perspective was adopted in Berlin in March 1999.
We can now say that this struggle has been successful.
We shall be able to adopt a Budget within this framework, which is a great success.
I believe, in actual fact, that both the Member States and the taxpayers are grateful that the charges are not still higher.
I also see it as a clear success that we are able to go into a new Budget year with a greater margin than in the past.
When we make use of 1.06 per cent of the Member States' GDP, this gives us a margin greater than ever before and greater than that predicted in Berlin less than two years ago.
This gives us an opportunity to be an active partner where enlargement to include the countries in Central and Eastern Europe is concerned and when it comes to helping establish peace and prosperity in Serbia and the former Yugoslavia.
For all this to be possible, there will have to be extensive prioritising in the future, too.
This will be necessary if we are successfully to honour our long-term commitments, something which is clearly possible if our objective is to work for an EU which is strong but, at the same time, circumscribed.
As I see it, there is a major threat in the present-day situation, namely BSE.
It is nonetheless important to note that we must cope successfully with this too within the current Budget framework.
This means that, if the solution to the problem requires still more money, this must be provided by means of other savings in Category 1 or through the Member States' accepting a larger portion of the cost.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I intend to focus on one fundamental point in my comments on the budget lines for environmental, public health and consumer protection policy.
Generally-speaking, the proportion of the budget earmarked in order to safeguard and maintain the environment is far too small.
This is particularly annoying in that environmental policy is a horizontal policy because environmental policy - or at least successful environmental policy - must be applied as a cross-border policy.
We all know that.
Which is why safeguarding and regenerating the environment is a job which has to be done at European Community level.
But this also means that we need to be given proper funding once and for all.
We cannot just keep on issuing endless directives and regulations, often without sufficient background information, scientific basis and generally to unbelievably short deadlines.
Allow me to make a comment: I am not the only one who constantly has the impression in these circumstances that my only purpose in sitting on the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy is to prevent the worst in the frenzy and rush of regulation which is thrust upon us.
We must not lose our sense of environmental direction by promoting small, local measures, however badly they may be needed, or by blindly shelling out money to institutions which appear to produce little in the way of results, which applies, in my view, to the European Environment Agency in Copenhagen.
What European environmental policy needs is a scientifically-based framework for action.
That is something we do not have.
And that is because we lack the foundations. We need to invest in scientific research and analysis.
Only then shall we be able to work out realistic prospects, prospects for linking environmental and health policies to other policy areas, prospects for what promises to be a successful and realistic approach to problem-solving.
That is the only right and the only sensible way of investing the money at our disposal on behalf of our fellow citizens.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I have three comments to make on what has been said during this debate.
The first relates to something which you reminded us of this morning, Mrs Schreyer. Compared with many national budgets, the increase in the Community is somewhat higher but, in relation to expenditure ratios, it is still very low and sets an excellent example for many national budgets.
We must tell the public that, if the national foreign or other secretaries of state keep handing work over to be carried out at European level, such as the whole Balkans programme, then we must also bear in mind that this work requires money and that funds must be made available.
My second comment relates to the common foreign and security policy. Tremendous progress was made here during the 1990s.
During the conflict in Bosnia, Europe was still not in a position to speak with one voice: one country was purported to be on the side of the Serbs, another to be on the side of the Croats.
We almost seemed to be back in the policy of alliances of the 19th century.
Now, at the end of this century, at the end of the 1990s, Europe is speaking with one voice, Europe is the biggest civil reconstructor in the Balkans, bigger than the United States, and is doing a good job; through its budget and its policy it really did help to make peaceful revolution possible in Serbia.
This needed to be said quite clearly about European policy at the end of this financial year and after this decade of confusion in the Balkans.
Foreign states are becoming more important to us and we hope that, with the new posts provided, the Commission will do the job which we expect it to do.
We are being up front with our praise and you may be sure that we shall seek to exercise strict control in the future.
There is much talk of post-Nice.
Nice was yet again the scene of national haggling for individual states.
We have overcome this to a considerable degree in foreign policy and I hope in the forthcoming budget debates that we shall take more decisions of substance and spend more time on the problems and less time haggling over national interests in this budget.
Mr President, honourable members, I only intend to comment on certain aspects raised during the debate.
First, the structure of the budget in 2001: one speaker said that the agricultural budget would not rise sufficiently.
However, I must stress that the agricultural budget has a very high rate of growth, namely 5.7%.
If we include the expected supplementary budget, it comes out at nearly 8%, while other areas, such as training policy, the whole of internal policy - including research -, foreign policy, administration and accession aid have together only risen by 1.1%.
We really must stress, therefore, that Parliament too has exercised immense budgetary discipline in the areas in which it has the last word but has, I think, brought about an excellent result with clear priorities nonetheless.
On Mr Mulder's comment: you noted that, because the budget at second reading was below the margin in agricultural policy, the risk of a change in exchange rates needed to be included in the calculation, because it would be not unwelcome if the euro were to rise against the dollar.
I would draw your attention here to the rules of the Interinstitutional Agreement, which state that a "currency risk" of up to EUR 200 million must be financed from the agricultural policy and that only then can recourse be taken to the currency reserve.
However, my view is that we should in fact take care in the supplementary budget to keep this reserve at EUR 200 million so that we do not have to take other measures if there is the slightest change in the exchange rate.
To Mrs Sommer's comment that too little account is taken of environmental aspects in the European Union budget, allow me to point out that one third of the budget is spent on structural policy and that we have mainstreaming in structural policy; we have gender mainstreaming to ensure that structural policy measures provide equal opportunities for men and women.
The money must be used in order to increase employment and - and this is the third mainstreaming - it must be used in order to improve the environmental situation. That gives us an enormous amount of money to play with.
May I also point out that the EUR 4.5 billion under agricultural policy for developing the countryside, which we discussed this morning, includes numerous measures to promote environmental protection.
In addition, agricultural policy also includes something in this area which is not standard practice in environmental policy and which fundamentalists may occasionally take a dim view of: namely that compensation is paid for refraining from taking environmentally damaging action.
Here are your measures which quite explicitly promote environmental protection.
I should like to comment again on the charming question put by Mr Colom i Naval this morning. He asked what was the difference between revising the financial perspective and using the flexibility instrument?
You are, of course, quite right to keep reverting to this question.
I see it like this: revising the financial perspective means that if we make an increase on one side, we must at the same time decide where savings can be made.
This requirement does not apply to the flexibility reserve.
In this respect, the finance ministers' reluctance to revise the financial perspective is even harder to understand. Oh well, we live and learn.
I guess this example also illustrates the fact that sometimes principles count for more than budgetary intentions.
I think it is a good thing that we have succeeded in activating the flexibility instruments and giving Serbia the help it needs on this occasion, although I fully agree with you that our strategy must be such that we prevent the phenomenon from arising whereby a European flexibility instrument wanders from one region or country of Europe to another, depending on where it is needed.
In closing, I should like once again to stress that, in the Commission's view, the 2001 budget provides an excellent basis on which we can together forge a good Community policy for Europe and I should like to thank you for the excellent cooperation.
And we shall have the opportunity of continuing this excellent cooperation on the supplementary budget in January.
But first I should like to wish all those involved in the budget a Happy Christmas!
Thank you very much, Commissioner.
Parliament also wishes you a Happy Christmas.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place on Thursday from 10.00 a.m.
Common strategy towards the Russian Federation
The next item is the debate on the report (A5-0363/2000) by Mr Oostlander, on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy, on the application of the European Union' s common strategy on the Russian Federation [2000/2007(INI)].
Mr President, our relations with Russia underwent a fundamental change when the cold war ended.
Fear of military violence or of a dictatorship that might advance further, is a thing of the past.
The attitude of the European Union and its Member States is now more one of a feeling of joint responsibility for the restoration of Russian society.
It can be regarded as a kind of moral duty but also as being in the interests of the European Union, which, of course, has nothing to gain from lawlessness and poverty in a very large neighbouring country.
Yet for many of us, the development of the Russian Federation is still a dubious matter and that is why I can imagine that people sometimes have their doubts about it, even in this Parliament.
In any case, the best thing we can do in our strategy towards the Russian Federation is to follow a twin-track strategy.
On the one hand, we must indict those who violate human rights and wield a disproportionate amount of power, clearly and forcefully, and on the other, we must enter into cooperation in a variety of sectors.
Both approaches are necessary if we are to help Russia become a flourishing, democratic constitutional state.
This is in our mutual interest.
That means condemning the gross violence in Chechnya and looking for ways of helping to end the war and assuage the suffering. So it is necessary for the European Union and the OECD to be present there.
We know, I am happy to say, that people in Russia are not indifferent to our criticism of what is happening there.
That comes up in quite a few conversations one has in Russia.
After all, Russia too wants to be assessed by the same standards that we apply to ourselves.
We would also do well to be severely critical of the visa measures vis-à-vis Georgia that have recently been undertaken, and provided for in amendments.
I am expecting a more extensive discussion to take place next month via the topical and urgent debate, and would suggest that we only give a limited preview of this debate in these resolutions.
In particular, I hope to be able to adopt half of the amendment tabled by the Greens on this issue.
It also behoves us to criticise the relations between Russia and the Baltic States, which are still to be regularised.
It will not be the fault of the latter.
They need Russia to regularise and establish its affairs with them effectively.
As far as cooperation with Russia is concerned, the Russian response to the strategy document of the European Union offers some good starting points.
The entry into force of scientific and technological cooperation with the Russian Federation is a good example.
In retrospect, the interruption of this cooperation was not a success, particularly as there appears to be little coordination in actions of this kind, between the European Union on the one hand and other major players, such as Japan and the United States, on the other.
We must take this lesson to heart for future reference.
The Northern Dimension is a clear example of cooperation that is to be put into concrete form.
In point of fact, this concept is underused, politically speaking.
It is an important concept, particularly in the fields of energy provision, care for the environment, the clearing up of nuclear waste, and the decommissioning of nuclear submarines.
In addition, it is possible to achieve various forms of cross-border cooperation that will prevent sharp disparities in wealth from arising.
Initiatives concerning cooperation with the region of Kaliningrad fit into the same framework.
We would argue in favour of having a separate budgetary line for developing this Northern Dimension in a coherent manner, along the lines of the one that we already have for cooperation with the three Baltic States.
However, I am of the opinion that the importance of Russia is not really reflected in the budget, but we disagree with the Social Democrats on that score.
If you take a close look, then roughly speaking, Russia is slightly ahead of Morocco in terms of budgetary importance, which cannot be right to my mind.
I could live with it though, if recital G on this aspect were to lapse, and in so doing if it were to be possible, with the support of the Social Democrats, to achieve a broader majority for this resolution, because this would send out a clearer signal to Russia.
We are hoping that the cooperation will extend to external policy.
The resolution refers to the Commission as the initiator of policy and to the High Representative as the coordinator of policy.
There are various regions where we could start the ball rolling, such as the Balkans, the Caucasus region and Central Asia.
A more relaxed discussion of mutual security interests would also have its uses, bearing in mind that, naturally, from my point of view and that of others and the majority of my group, NATO, and within this framework, our bond with North America, are absolutely paramount in matters of security.
We will follow the developments in Russian society and internal politics with great interest.
We hope that a truly civil society will soon flourish there and form the permanent basis for a real political democracy.
I hope that links will be established at all levels between organisations, individuals and associations in the EU and their counterparts in the Russian Federation.
This will help to spread awareness of the values we all share.
Mr President, Russia has yet to come to terms with herself, to decide what sort of society she wants to create and define her position in the world.
For over seventy years, her development was distorted and held back by the monstrous experiment of communism which grew to threaten us all.
I must say I very much welcome Mr Oostlander's report for its very reasonable and balanced approach, praising constructive reforms while criticising blatant human rights abuses.
But let me say a couple of words about our strategic relationship.
While encouraging a strong economic relationship between the European Union and Russia coupled with efforts at political cooperation, we must take care that we do not create for ourselves some sort of strategic dependency.
For example, it has been suggested in the context of European defence policy - about which I have to say we continue to have reservations - that the European Union might turn to Russia to provide strategic airlift capabilities to complement the arrangements already in place between the WEU and Ukraine.
Now I am in favour of encouraging Russia and the Ukraine to move in our direction and cooperate with other alliance countries in crisis-management tasks, but I would not be in favour of us moving in their direction or adjusting our policies in order to accommodate them.
It would be a very dangerous situation if the Europeans were to become logistically reliant on Russia.
If we do not have our own strategic airlift then we already have a tried and tested ally in the United States - and in this context I am sure that Mr Oostlander has no desire for Russia to supplant the United States as a strategic partner for Europe.
We must work in the closest possible harmony with the United States in our dealings with Russia and certainly must not give Russia the impression that there are divisions to be exploited.
This would be in no one's interests.
Secondly, we must take great care to ensure diversity of production and supply in terms of energy.
Already some 40% of natural gas supply for the EU comes from Russia, and an increasing proportion of oil imports now come from the CIS countries, where known reserves are larger than those in the United States and North Sea combined.
Many of the transit routes for these are through areas of great conflict.
It is in our interests to do all we can to help stabilise that region by economic and political means, ensuring that we do nothing to encourage or sustain instability in the Caucasus and the southern regions of Russia.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the common strategy towards the Russian Federation was the first common strategy in the history of the European Union.
That alone illustrates the importance which the EU attaches to its relations with the Russian Federation.
The dual strategy of cooperation and criticism which Mr Oostlander develops in his report is, in the opinion of my group, eminently suited to the situation in the Russian Federation.
However, this sort of strategy is a complex subject and all the institutions and the Member States must approach it in a strictly coordinated and circumspect manner.
As the Oostlander report demonstrates, this is not always easy and Parliament must ensure that it works in a very orderly fashion here.
Now to the most important points in the report: the Russian Federation is important to the Union for both security policy and economic reasons, of that there can be no doubt.
The PCA provides the necessary contractual basis here and - if it is applied fully - the instruments needed in order to react to a whole spectrum of developments.
The agreement contains a human rights clause and provisions governing the establishment of democratic rule of law.
Our economic relations with the Russian Federation have fluctuated enormously over past years, depending on various crisis situations.
But, most importantly, there is a lack of foreign investment in the Russian Federation, coupled with a huge drain on the profits of Russia companies.
Unless the Russian Federation rectifies this situation by creating, post haste, the necessary legal and security framework and hence a more friendly investment climate, there would appear to be no way out of the economic crisis, high oil prices notwithstanding.
And programmes such as TACIS can only be of limited help here - more to the point, they barely scratch the surface.
The Commission's priority task should therefore be to improve the effectiveness of the funds deployed under the programme and, more importantly, to enhance its visibility.
What is important, I think, is that it should continue to be the political responsibility of the administrative staff and should not turn into project management.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I think we often underestimate the fact that a balance struck with the Russian Federation is a guarantee of peace in Europe.
This highlights the importance of the strategy towards the Russian Federation and, at the same time, the importance of your report, Mr Oostlander.
However, as we have already said, the Russian Federation is a difficult partner.
Even if President Putin guarantees the democratic development of his country, that does not automatically guarantee a stable and democratic Russian Federation.
Basic democratic order is not a fact of life in the Russian Federation and this is a problem, especially when it comes to cooperation with the European Union, because, for us, any such cooperation must be based on respect for human and minority rights, and we have made that clear.
This means that the twin-track strategy posited in the report is very, very important.
We want outstanding cooperation with the Russian Federation, but we cannot accept the Russian Federation's continuing to wage war on its own people in Chechnya, a war which has continued uninterrupted for a year now.
We are also hugely critical of the Russian Federation's provocative visa policy towards Georgia and call for this decision to be revoked at once.
Nor can we tolerate the manner in which the freedom of the press is trampled underfoot in the Russian Federation.
I think the Prodi plan may bring a new dimension to cooperation with the Russian Federation and provides an important basis.
Let us not forget the basis we had in the European Union, with the coal and steel plan guaranteeing lasting peaceful cooperation between France and Germany.
And look where we are now.
The energy community with the Russian Federation may well take on a political dimension in exactly the same way.
That means that we have a joint responsibility for peace in the Caucasus, for environmental protection in the Russian Federation and for the rights of its indigenous people.
Mr President, we must establish cooperation with Russia, a country wounded in its statehood, so that she can become a European state that aspires to education and culture.
Mr Oostlander' s report is crucially important and it sets out to achieve this cooperation.
We have to use our combined powers to heal the wounds that ten years of crude capitalism have inflicted on Russia.
Boycotts will not resolve the problem.
Things are now going badly for Russia.
There is no middle class: there are just the super-rich and the super-poor.
Half the population live below the poverty line.
The country is in sharp moral decline: it is almost like Sodom and Gomorra.
There are fears that the number of HIV-positive cases will rise in the next few years to close on 600 000, and the disease is also beginning to hit young people hard.
Eighty per cent of new infections concern people under the age of 25.
The birth rate is dropping, the mortality rate is going up, and the net loss in Russia' s population amounts to a million a year.
That goes to show just how bad things are for the people there.
The country is also burdened by the need to protect nature and human beings from old mistakes.
There are still 300 tons of anthrax bacteria manufactured for purposes of biological warfare in existence there, and just a small dose is lethal.
Dozens of tons of waste plutonium have to be destroyed as a result of disarmament negotiations.
The EU must help Russia, because in that way it is also preventing risks that would threaten itself.
The most important area of cooperation is energy policy, which is connected with superpower politics, which governs, for example, the transportation of oil and gas from the east to the west.
Today 30-40% of EU gas comes from Russia, and in ten years' time the EU will be almost totally dependent on Russian gas.
There is no northern, western or southern alternative for this.
The EU countries should not be a geopolitical extension of the United States in matters of gas and oil pipelines.
The EU is no threat to the Russians, but a unipolar world under the leadership of the USA is.
The Russians cannot, at least not yet, oppose NATO' s sly expansion through the militarisation of EU structures.
Slyness does not become us: we must build a Europe of economic cooperation.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I think we should pay tribute to Mr Oostlander for having stressed the importance of the role of the Commission and, in particular, of Mr Patten as the Commissioner responsible for external relations, in the implementation of this common strategy.
Contrary to what previous speakers have said, I do not believe that this strategy has been successful to date.
Unfortunately, the major financial scandals which continue to punctuate relations between Russia and international finance, and a number of projects involving the international community, clearly illustrate as much.
I cannot really agree with Mr Oostlander' s approach to the issue of human rights and democracy in the context of the Russian Federation.
I have put forward a number of amendments intended to place rather more emphasis on these issues.
Mr Oostlander does not customarily welcome my amendments and I was not therefore very surprised to see that they had not been included.
Regarding Chechnya, in particular, I do not think it is possible to say, Mr Oostlander, that the solution cannot be purely military.
I think that the solution cannot be military, as the situation clearly demonstrates, and that it can only be political.
Mr Putin himself - and we would not even be going as far as him - said that the issue of the future status of Chechnya is not the main issue.
Yet we do not dare say as much in our report. This, I believe, is not acceptable.
Nor do I think it acceptable, moreover, to fail to state that it is absolutely intolerable, after one and a half years of war in Chechnya, that our Commissioner for humanitarian aid, Mr Nielson, has not yet truly set foot in Chechnya.
Nor do I think it acceptable that the European Union should fail to respond to the murders of journalists covering the war in Chechnya.
These are not isolated instances but repeated occurrences.
A member of my party, a radical militant journalist, was murdered several weeks ago in Tbilisi, a city clearly under the control of Russian troops.
I do not feel the Commission and the Council can fail to respond to an event of such seriousness.
Mr Van Orden is quite right in what he says regarding the Caucasus.
We are currently witnesses to an absolutely dreadful deterioration of the situation in Georgia.
The country is completely destabilised, literally strangled by the Russian Federation.
It is on the point of collapse and the European Union is offering no practical response to this rejection, this ban by the Russian authorities regarding the introduction of visas.
It could respond by cancelling visas for Georgians travelling to the European Union.
It could and should start to consider Georgia' s accession before it is too late, before there is another Balkans situation at the very gateway to Europe.
Mr President, the current line taken by the Kremlin does not give the least cause for optimism.
On the domestic front, President Putin has explicitly opted for an enforced recentralisation policy, his watchword being 'all power to the Kremlin' .
When it comes to overseas affairs, Moscow does not wish to comply with international obligations.
The attitude of the Russian diplomats at the OSCE Summit held in Vienna at the end of November, spoke volumes in this respect.
There is to be no withdrawal of Russian troops from Moldova, nor are the Russian military bases in Georgia to be closed.
Incidentally, how does the EU view the latest Russian manoeuvre against Georgia?
I am referring to the introduction of a visa obligation for Georgians, with the exception of the Abkhazians and the South Ossetians.
Surely that is completely out of kilter with the rapporteur' s idea of a certain degree of convergence between the foreign and security policy of the European Union and Russia in the Caucasus?
After all, that would be sending out the wrong signal to Kremlin boss Putin at entirely the wrong moment.
The famous Russian opposition politician, Grigori Jawlinski, has made it into western newspaper columns again lately.
Using cutting words he condemned the uncritical stance of the West towards the occupant of the Kremlin.
He said western politicians do not understand Russia.
Indeed, they fear Russia.
Hence they choose the line of least resistance.
They want to have a friend in the Kremlin.
It makes no odds to the west what is happening with Russia, its people and society.
Mr Oostlander' s report contradicts the latter sentiment and I would like to compliment him on that.
And yet Jawlinkski' s portrayal of Europe' s struggle with the phenomenon of Russia is very apt.
Mr President, may I, on behalf of the European Liberal Democrats, thank and congratulate Mr Oostlander. His was a well prepared report.
The Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, and Common Security and Defence Policy got its most important proposals approved and in the final vote we supported the adoption of the report.
Mr Oostlander' s report clearly denounces the excessive use of force that Russia was guilty of in Chechnya.
Failings in the implementation of human rights and democracy have also been clearly brought to light.
On the other hand, the report supports a strategic partnership between the EU and Russia.
Cooperation with Russia needs to be reinforced.
A separate budgetary heading is being proposed for the Northern Dimension and increased aid to Russia, in general, is being recommended.
The report also supports the development of energy cooperation between the Union and Russia.
It is important for the Union that the availability of oil and natural gas is secured by creating alternatives.
Moves to exploit the gas and oil resources in the Barents region should be speeded up, while, at the same time, production in the Komi and Caspian Sea regions and the infrastructure for transporting the products out of those regions should be improved in terms of technology.
Now that the Nice Summit seems to be opening up the avenue towards swift enlargement of the Union, it is important to show determination in getting to grips with those problems which enlargement threatens to create for relations between the Member States and Russia.
We need flexibility, particularly in arrangements regarding trade and the mobility of people.
However, the main solution is for cooperation between the Union and Russia to be enhanced, bringing down the barriers between us.
As the Union expands it will also be important to think about its internal differentiation, which might, for its part, ease border area problems.
On the other hand, there is reason to hope the Russian Federation will also consider decentralising the power of decision and the issue of internal differentiation, allowing the possibility of abolishing borders.
By this I mean, for example, making special economic areas of Kaliningrad, Murmansk, Karelia and other parts of Russia bordering the Union.
Mr President, I should like to thank Mr Oostlander for his outstanding and comprehensive report, for the extraordinary amount of time which he has invested in it and for his receptiveness to suggestion.
Anyone looking at Russia from the outside and with the odd personal experience from visiting the country itself and speaking to Russian counterparts will soon be in danger of selectively tailoring reality in the Russian Federation to fit his personal image.
Current discussions on the Russian state symbol show that there are several takes on reality in the Russian Federation.
The national flag of Peter the Great flutters alongside the army's red flag and the national coat of arms showing the Tsarist double-headed eagle is displayed while Stalinist national anthems are being sung.
These symbols are perhaps not as contradictory as they first appear, each reflecting as it does a facet of an authoritarian state.
But a whole spectrum lies between these diametrically-opposed historical perspectives and pro-active Russian society will certainly refuse to be reduced to or guided towards any of these authoritarian alternatives.
I personally become more and more enthusiastic when I meet young, open, well-educated Russians and more and more depressed by Russian structures, be they state, economic or even mafia structures.
The best way we can help the Russian Federation is, on the one hand, to refrain from wholesale damnation and clearly address unhealthy structures or individual policies, such as the Chechen policy and, on the one hand, to value positive developments, without talking up, writing up or thinking up the Russian Federation as a whole.
We can contribute towards stability from the outside by sending the Russian Federation clear and specific signals as to how we wish to configure our cooperation.
Once Poland and the Baltic States accede to the EU, we hope to use the greater geographical proximity to the Russian Federation to strengthen cross-border cooperation in the area of Saint Petersburg, Nowgorod and Kaliningrad.
Transport, energy, the environment and internal security are right at the top of the list of possibilities.
Negotiations to find creative solutions as regards the future freedom of transit for the people of Kaliningrad through Lithuania and Poland should also be completed before Poland and Lithuania accede to the EU.
Why not make the Oblast of Kaliningrad a pilot project on two counts: first in relation to the potential for economic cooperation between the Russian Federation and the EU and, secondly, to test the Russian Federation's ability to implement fundamental reforms such as rural, fiscal and administrative reforms in advance in this area with our support?
That is the way to bind the Russian Federation to the EU.
Mr President, in recent years the European Union has finalised various documents relating to the Russian Federation which form a good basis for close relations with it.
The common strategy is one of them.
Despite all its contradictions, Europeans clearly see Russia as part of Europe and have a huge interest in a stable, democratically-organised Russian Federation with good economic prospects which plays a confident part in and helps to shape international policy.
The West also needs the Russian Federation as an important international partner if Europe is to be reshaped after the change.
It is this interest which has led the Union to develop specific fields of activity in numerous areas in the common strategy towards the Russian Federation and other documents.
They include consolidating the rule of law and strengthening government institutions.
They also include developing a civil society as an important precondition to consolidating democracy.
In the economic sector, the Union is endeavouring to integrate the Russian Federation into a common economic and social area.
The Union is already the Russian Federation's most important processing, investment and trading partner, accounting for over 40%. But there is still huge potential here.
Experts have calculated that trade between the European Union and the Russian Federation only accounts for one-third of what might be expected, given the Russian Federation's gross national product and its proximity to EU markets.
In the political sector, the common strategy towards the Russian Federation proposes entering into a standing dialogue on policy and security and creating a permanent mechanism for such dialogue.
It would be interesting to expound on this, but time is too short.
The EU sets great store in its Russian policy by environmental protection and nuclear safety.
Unfortunately, this momentum in relations between the Russian Federation and the EU has come up against a counter force - cue Chechnya, which has seriously hampered relations.
The substance and methods of the internal consolidation being pursued by the Putin regime will have a significant influence on the nature of our relations.
We can only hope that the current pragmatic and realistic partnership will perhaps one day become a real strategic partnership.
Mr President, given the economic and geopolitical importance of Russia, the European Union believes it must seek a common strategy on the subject.
The report contains many empty phrases and, in particular, pious hopes.
It is not just because each of the major European powers is primarily concerned with safeguarding the interests of its own capitalist groups, but in the final analysis, what does capitalist Europe have to offer Russia?
Economic growth?
Yet for the last ten years the Russian economy has done nothing but collapse.
An end to the preponderance of queues?
Yet what use are more or less well stocked shops if, with unemployment, and retirement pensions and wages at a low level or not even paid, one third of the population is living below the poverty line and does not have any money to buy the goods?
Democracy?
Yet under the guise of democracy there is domination by official and unofficial mafias.
Freedom?
Yet the freedom which the reintroduction of capitalism has brought Russia is freedom only for a narrow range of bureaucrats left over from the previous regime to pillage natural resources and transfer the proceeds to Western banks.
And indeed, what does freedom mean for the Chechen people?
In voting against this report I wish to stress the inability of the capitalist economy and the western world to bring progress and prosperity to the peoples of the Russian Federation or indeed to the majority of peoples on this earth.
Mr President, I should like to thank Mr Oostlander for his sterling contribution as rapporteur.
As a Swedish Christian Democrat, I fully support the two-strategy model which Mr Oostlander presents, involving vigorous, consistent and sustained criticism of all crimes, especially crimes within Russia against human rights, but also involving close and intimate cooperation with Russia, our large neighbour in the East.
Recital KK in the report states the following: 'given that Russia is in a political union with Belarus, it is appropriate in the interest of Russia' s democratic legitimacy for President Putin and the Russian government to point out clearly and consistently the comprehensive need for democratic progress and reforms in Belarus, not least in the light of the report submitted by the parliamentary troika from the EU, the Council of Europe and the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in Minsk on 16 October 2000' .
I am the author of that paragraph, which has been applauded in the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy.
I should here like to highlight the value of our really emphasising the seriousness of Russia' s in actual fact being in a political union with Belarus.
With reference to the report we presented in Minsk, we first of all emphasised that the Belarus Parliament is at present lacking in powers, cannot legislate, does not have the right of veto against Presidential decrees and cannot adopt budgets.
Secondly, we pointed out that electoral law has disqualified a quarter of the candidates in this so-called parliamentary election in October.
Thirdly, we discussed access to the media, which is unfairly organised in a State-controlled system.
Fourthly, we discussed the administrative criminal law which makes it illegal to urge a boycott of elections.
Belarus is therefore in political union with Russia.
It is important for us to emphasise the seriousness of this for Russia too.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, questions of human rights are important to us, and they are not the private affairs of any one country.
The war in Chechnya is a case in point, and, for example, this labour legislation now under discussion will reduce employees' rights quite drastically.
We have, however, tried a boycott policy, and that had no effect on this war.
The twin-track strategy proposed by Mr Oostlander offers a way out, for which I thank him.
This is the first strategy on Russia in our history.
Multi-faceted cooperation will help to stabilise conditions in Russia.
That will be the first step, after which attempts will be made to achieve respect for the law, which will be the second step, and then, economic development will bring more stability, all of which will bring about the features of civil society we expect.
The result will finally be more human rights, which we all desire.
This report thus creates the possibility for constructing a multilayer structure.
For this reason I think it will be an important breakthrough.
We have already laid the foundations of a period of cooperation with Russia during which the political leadership has changed.
We uphold the criticisms, but we will not sever our contact as we did after the civil war, which was followed by Stalin' s persecutions and all the terrors.
The Northern Dimension, which is important, will receive its own budget funds under this proposal, which is a very important issue.
I, myself, suggest that energy should be made the driving force behind this important project, as that is something we need, that is where the money is, and since we have the money, we can also spend it on the infrastructure, on hospitals, environmental issues and so on.
Money from energy: both sides need cooperation for that, and especially in parts of northern Russia, which I would urge Russia to turn to.
It is peaceful there and soldiers are not needed to guard the pipeline.
Do you intend to support a project such as this, Commissioner Patten?
Mr President, a few days ago, the Duma decided that the Soviet anthem would be Russia's national anthem.
The music and words and the decision by the Duma are not overly significant.
What is significant is that the majority of Russian citizens supported this move.
What I want to know is why these people did not choose the Marseillaise or God save the Queen as their anthem of hope for a brave new world, preferring instead to turn the clock back to a regime which many of my fellow members have described as inhumane, criminal and so on.
What is the significance of the ten years since Russia was suddenly catapulted into the free market and into contact with western values?
Do we not know what their significance is?
The responsibilities are, of course, mainly Russia's, both for the past and the present.
But do the European Union, the United States and the other powers bear no responsibility?
This is the mafia we are talking about.
Where does the mafia have its roots, if not within the Kremlin itself?
Who were Yeltsin's protectors and agents all that time?
Who fought tooth and nail to support Yeltsin inside Russia?
This is power hijacking we are talking about.
Which banks is the money from foreign loans and/or the money hoarded inside Russia paid into?
Is it the Bank of Havana or the Bank of Algeria?
It is paid into the large western banks!
And how is it controlled? And where are the prostitution networks operating?
What I am getting at is that someone must take responsibility for what has happened over the past ten years, including the European Union.
From what certain speakers have said, the winner-takes-all model obviously applies.
The cold-war model has been replaced by the winner-takes-all model.
What are we afraid of?
Dependency on Russia? Can the entire European Union, with Germany, the United Kingdom, Italy, Spain and everyone else present in Nice really depend on Russia?
Or will we opt for mutual dependency as we do with every other large power in today's world?
The point at issue here is Russia's role.
What was Russia's role when NATO was taking decisions on a neighbouring area, on the Balkans, without so much as a nod to the UN, to which Russia belongs, or to the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe?
How come this power was not terrified?
What I am trying to say is that we need to change our stand: we must not feel and we must not sow the seeds of fear; we must look for a partner which needs our help and support.
I very much welcome this report and I should like to pay tribute to Mr Oostlander for producing it.
His report has been welcomed by all parts of Parliament except, perhaps by those who look back with nostalgia to the not-so-golden days memorialised by a very large number of brave Soviet dissidents.
But it is an excellent report which, like the common strategy itself, underlines the importance that we attach to the relationship - the strategic partnership - between the European Union and Russia.
The report endorses what is being called our "double track strategy" towards Russia, a strategy that combines plain speaking on issues like Chechnya - to which I will return in a few moments - with a continuing effort to build an effective relationship based on shared values and cooperation.
The common strategy and Russia's medium-term strategy for relations with the EU have created a new dynamism.
The common strategy identified initiatives in foreign policy, security and the fight against crime.
Other areas where we seek to bolster European Union cooperative efforts towards Russia are the rule of law and democracy building, civil society, twinnings as well as regional and cross-border cooperation and, above all, the Northern Dimension Initiative, to which a number of Members referred.
We strongly support the Russian Government's economic reform programme which is vital to improve the investment climate.
In this context, as Parliament will know, at the last summit between the European Union and Russia, Romano Prodi launched a far-reaching dialogue on energy.
These are all areas in which the Commission has a powerful contribution to make, as the report repeatedly makes clear.
Our technical assistance programme - in particular Tacis - already responds to many of the priorities identified by this report.
The core Tacis Programme, worth EUR 34 million, focuses on education, the rule of law, democracy and civil society development, including regional media freedom, protection of individual rights and support to self-government.
The subsequent action programme - to a value of EUR 58 million - focuses on institution-building, on the rule of law in the economic field and on improvements to the business and investment climate.
The honourable Member's report rightly stresses the need for our Moscow delegation to play a bigger part in the management of our financial assistance, and I am determined to see significant progress in this direction as part of our wider reform of European Union external aid programmes.
The report comments on the Northern Dimension.
We too see this as an important mechanism for regional cooperation for the development of the north-west Russian regions as well as Kaliningrad.
I am anxious to work closely with the incoming Swedish presidency to make concrete progress on the Northern Dimension.
This means concentrating our efforts on key areas like the environment - which has been referred to by a number of Members - and nuclear safety, on Kaliningrad itself and on improving coordination between different sources of funding.
We are acutely aware of the urgent need to tackle environmental threats from nuclear storage facilities and rusting decommissioned submarines, especially in the north-west part of Russia, for example, around the Kola Peninsula.
This is a formidable task. It requires a combined international and Russian effort.
The Commission has taken a leading role in the negotiation of an international agreement establishing the multilateral nuclear environment programme for Russia.
Those negotiations are now at a key stage and we hope for significant progress by March 2001.
There is also a pressing need to raise environmental awareness in Russia.
This is exactly the objective of the environmental work programme for the Russian Federation, initialled last June in the framework of our partnership and cooperation agreement.
Just a word on Kaliningrad: the partnership and cooperation agreement already offers an institutional framework for our dialogue with Russia on trade, visa and border issues.
At the same time the development of the region has already benefited from Tacis projects amounting to about EUR 30 million since 1991.
We are now finalising a communication to the Council on Kaliningrad. We are in the process of opening an office in Kaliningrad.
I very much hope to visit Kaliningrad myself in the early part of next year, and not just because Immanuel Kant spent the whole of his life there.
It is a serious issue that we need to address as part of the Northern Dimension.
In all of the areas I have outlined we are working closely with Russia to our mutual benefit.
We are working to strengthen Russian democracy, reinforce the rule of law and transform the Russian economy.
That is all to the good, but there remains one serious impediment to further improvements in the ties between Russia and the European Union: I refer, of course, to Chechnya.
At the last European Union Russian Summit in October, President Putin acknowledged the urgent need for a political solution to the conflict.
I have to say to honourable Members - and I will abbreviate what I might have said at much greater length - we are profoundly concerned about the humanitarian situation in Chechnya.
We are concerned about the continuing reports of human rights abuses, for example from NGOs like Médecins sans Frontières and Human Rights Watch.
We hope that we will be able to make a great deal more progress with the Russian authorities in addressing those issues in the months ahead.
We are profoundly concerned about the likely fate of thousands of refugees in Ingushetiya and Chechnya this coming winter.
It is because we take our relationship with Russia so seriously that these issues matter.
They cannot just be brushed under the carpet.
We have to return to them again and again, but we must also continue, as the honourable gentleman's report wisely recognises, to engage with Russia.
We must avoid the mistake to which an honourable gentleman referred earlier, which was made at the start of the last century, when Russia was effectively excluded from European affairs after the Leninist revolution in 1917 with disastrous consequences.
We shall therefore persevere with the common strategy to build on the progress achieved to heed many of the points raised in the honourable gentleman's report, and above all to strengthen the hands of the Russian Federation.
Just one further word about a point that was raised by a couple of speakers in the debate - and that is the question of Georgia and visas.
We have already expressed serious concern over the way in which Russia unilaterally introduced visa requirements for Georgian citizens on 5 December.
The entire international community, not excluding Russia, is committed to supporting the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the independent states.
Actions by any country in the region which could have the effect of undermining that sovereignty carry significant implications.
If more favourable visa requirements are applied to the inhabitants of secessionist regions or if they are exempted altogether, this would imply support for the legitimacy of their regimes.
Georgia is a member of the United Nations, a member of the OSCE, a member of the Council of Europe, and it has a partnership and cooperation agreement with the European Union.
It deserves our support.
We call upon the states of the region to use the OSCE mechanisms to resolve their disputes quickly before real damage can be caused.
I congratulate the honourable gentleman once again on an extremely good report on a very important issue, to which I am sure we will return in this Parliament over the next few years again and again.
The honourable gentleman has given us a very important and useful political and intellectual infrastructure for our future discussions.
Thank you, Commissioner.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Question Time (Council)
The next item is questions to the Council (B5-0559/2000).
Question No 1 by (H-0864/00):
Subject: Genetically modified organisms and crops Since the Spring of this year there have been many cases of the release into the environment in various EU countries of genetically modified organisms and crops, namely cotton, oil seed rape and maize.
In some cases measures have been taken, but not in others, and in certain instances no official announcements or findings have been made.
It should be pointed out that in many cases Directive 90/220/EEC has clearly been repeatedly breached.
What action does the Council intend to take to address these problems and, in particular, what position does it intend to adopt in the short and longer term?
Thank you very much, Minister, for your answer.
The question was as follows: there have been cases where this directive has been breached and GMOs have been released into the environment.
I gave examples in my question.
You are placing me in a very difficult position.
It is the task of the Commission to ensure that the directive is adhered to.
It has probably not done so or has done so inefficiently, I do not know.
It is the task of Member States to implement the directive, transposing it into their national legislation.
In the case in question, the Member State has not done so.
I should like to think this was an oversight.
In Greece, we have been told, in the case of modified cotton, that it would be exported.
The Commission' s answer to a question similar to the one I have asked was that farmers were to be compensated and that the genetically modified cotton was to be exported.
Will the Council be able to help me out of this difficult position?
To whom should I turn for information?
Is it really legal to export this type of material?
I still find it hard to believe, Minister, and I should like an answer.
I would remind you that the Council has determined its common position on this proposal and that conciliation therefore is drawing to a close.
The entire procedure should be concluded by 4 January 2001 at the latest.
This common position sets much more stringent requirements for the Member States.
I therefore believe that this is where you will find an answer to your questions.
Mr Papayannakis, I have given you all the information I have.
Could the President-in-Office agree that there can be substantial benefits for the environment, human health, developing countries and European science and business from GMO crops?
Is there a risk that Europe could miss out on the benefits if we respond to hysteria rather than to scientific fact?
The Lisbon Summit declared that the European Union was to be the most dynamic and competitive knowledge-based economy in the world.
Is the Council prepared to give a lead by championing the biotech industry with a faster rate of field trials and product approvals by the Member States?
I fear that you are taking us into a fundamental debate which we do not have time to go into here and now.
I believe we must assess both the scope and the limitations of any scientific progress.
Mr President, this debate is already overdue because the BSE crisis has huge implications for feedingstuffs, both home-grown and imported.
We currently have a ban on animal and bone meal, which is why we need to find a clear position here.
It is because of the BSE crisis that we are pressed for time.
When, do you think, we shall be able to say that we can supply 100% non-genetically modified feedingstuffs in Europe?
Will this label be available shortly so that consumers can rely on there being a supply of 100% non-genetically modified feedingstuffs?
I must answer the honourable Member in the same way that I answered the previous questioner.
This is a debate which needs to take place, but I think that Question Time is not the right place for it.
This is quite unsatisfactory. That is what Question Time is about!
We have a question, we are entitled to ask a supplementary question and we certainly expect to have a proper response from the Council of Ministers.
That is why we have come here.
Mr President, I hope you will remonstrate with the Council.
I should at least like to respond to the honourable Member' s lack of satisfaction, so that these remarks may be entered in the Minutes, as I cannot allow him to get away with saying something as unfair as that.
We are involved in a highly regimented procedure here: the Council is required to give answers to a great many extremely specific questions in a very short period of time and there is, I believe, no one here who would claim to be able to expand upon extremely complex social issues in just one minute.
It would be both unwise and foolish for the Council to attempt to do so.
I am therefore perfectly willing to propose that such a debate be held, on condition that the most appropriate forum is chosen.
I feel that it would be irresponsible of me to give impromptu answers regarding GMOs in only a minute, and that would not be in keeping with the policy of this presidency.
Question No 2 by (H-0871/00):
Subject: Situation in Chechnya How does the Council assess the present situation in Chechnya, and what efforts has it made in the last six months to try to stop the bloodshed?
The Council continues to be deeply concerned by the situation in Chechnya, where violence continues and the humanitarian situation continues to be very worrying at the onset of winter.
For the moment there are no signs of a political settlement to the conflict.
The Council has expressed its concern at many meetings with Russia at all levels, particularly seeking to induce Russia to avoid the excessive use of force and to avoid any extension of the conflict, to carry out independent and efficient inquiries into human rights violations, to support the OSCE Assistance Group in fulfilling its mission and, finally, to ensure that humanitarian aid is distributed properly.
In particular, the Council has pointed out that only a political solution could bring this crisis to an end.
At the last EU-Russian Summit on 30 October 2000 in Paris, the matter was raised by both presidents.
Mr Putin agreed that there was an urgent need to find a solution of this kind.
For the first time, Russia accepted wording to this effect in the joint declaration issued following the summit.
In this context, while remaining resolutely opposed to talks with what he refers to as "terrorists" , Mr Putin has indicated the need to distinguish between terrorists and those who have fought in good faith for Chechen independence.
Indeed, Mr Putin has stated that the Assistance Group may in the near future return to Chechnya.
I would point out that this has not yet come about.
Mr President, two brief supplementary questions.
First: did the Council contact President Maskhadov, who was democratically elected under the supervision of the OSCE, and other forces of democracy in Chechnya in a bid to find a peaceful solution?
Secondly: has the Council obtained information from the Council of Europe's Commissioner for Human Rights, who is well represented locally?
I do not have information exact enough to enable me to answer your supplementary question.
All I can say is that we shall continue to liase closely with the Commissioner for Human Rights.
Mr President-in-Office of the Council, we in Parliament have tried in vain to urge Mr Nielson, the Commissioner responsible for humanitarian matters, to visit Chechnya, not just for the sake of an official visit but to carry out a serious survey of the humanitarian situation.
We have not succeeded in convincing him.
Could the French Presidency take the baton from us and contact Mr Nielson, urging him to go to Chechnya in the near future?
The Commission will, naturally, be informed of the content of our debates.
Mr President, a point of order: it is standard practice in the House for questions which cannot be adequately answered orally to be submitted in writing.
I would ask the President-in-Office to at least answer our questions in writing if he cannot do so orally.
As you know, we are studying ways of reorganising our work.
One of the points covered by the document presented by Vice-President Provan is the form to be taken by Question Time to the Council and the Commission.
Effectively, we have noted that Council, Commission and Members of Parliament have all been somewhat dissatisfied on several occasions.
Therefore, if the Council so wishes, it can reply in writing, as you request.
However, it must be borne in mind that it is, in effect, sometimes impossible, sometimes difficult and rarely a simple matter to reply to supplementary questions.
Mr President, I just wanted to say that it was standard practice under the other presidencies to give a precise answer to a supplementary question.
The President-in-Office must know if he met Mr Maskhadov or not.
How can he say he does not have any precise information?
I would like to state that I am in complete agreement with what the chairman said just now.
This Question Time is clearly not satisfactory.
I have attended the European Parliament on many occasions and have been involved in all sorts of very interesting procedures.
This is not one of them. You can see for yourselves that the Chamber is far from full.
There are perhaps a dozen people here.
I say that this is not satisfactory either for the Council or for Parliament.
Please do not get agitated.
(Interruption by Mr Posselt)
Please, that is enough; this is really a trivial issue.
I am simply trying to present a procedural issue.
Indeed this is something about which I have written to your President, Nicole Fontaine, and she agrees with me.
I feel that the procedure must be reformed in a quite simple way to enable Members of Parliament to receive more specific answers on subjects which must be better organised.
The Council Presidency, sir, is not a government or a single person, but a country working together with the departments of the general secretariat of the Council, and here we give you the precise answers which we have to precise questions.
If you are going to indulge in filibustering, then it is going to take hours.
The procedure must therefore be amended or reformed.
This is something I must stress and, sir, it has nothing to do with totally misplaced value judgements.
Question No 3 by (H-0876/00):
Subject: Council's position on the problems linked with alcohol shipments subject to excise duty This serious issue is a problem in many Member States (Belgium, the United Kingdom, Denmark, Germany, the Netherlands and Italy). Is the Council aware of this, of the costs involved for companies which ship alcohol and of the very high risk of fraud and smuggling?
What improvements does the Council intend to make to the basic directive, 92/12/EEC, to ensure that the shipper' s and recipient' s responsibilities are precisely apportioned, precluding any possibility of fraud?
What is the Council' s opinion of the possibility of eliminating this serious problem through computerised monitoring operated by customs authorities in the dispatching country and in the country of arrival or transit?
Could this possible solution be put into practice very rapidly, in view of the fact that the Commission has shown particular interest in solving the problem through proposals and high-level groups, and is clearly ready to take firm action in this area?
The Council would remind the honourable Member of the conclusions adopted at the Council meeting of 19 May 1998 regarding fraud in the alcohol and tobacco industries.
On that occasion, it stressed the need for Members States and the Commission to tackle fraud in the area of excise duty on alcohol and tobacco.
It also approved the summary of the report from the high-level group on fraud in the alcohol and tobacco sector.
Finally, it stressed the importance, subject to the results of a feasibility study proposed by the Commission, of a computer-based monitoring system as a long-term objective.
The Council also undertook to make provision, in the meantime, for the immediate implementation of an efficient selective early warning system.
Since then, the Commission has worked to achieve this.
The Council urges the honourable Member to address that institution on the subject directly, in order to ascertain the details of the above-mentioned measures and the state of progress in implementing them.
Mr President, I think the question was quite specific.
The Member in question, that is yours truly, did attempt to approach the Commission, which informally provided him with information regarding a situation which could be described as a deadlock.
This directive dates from 1992.
The problem is well-known - common knowledge in fact - and it is part of the more serious issue of tax evasion, to which we are all extremely sensitive, but it is also extremely damaging to the firms which have no way of coordinating or monitoring it at all.
This is why I have had to approach the Council.
I now take note of the fact that you have spoken of an undertaking.
As a supplementary question, I would like to ask whether you are in any way able to forecast your action, seeing as the Commission appears to be ready and willing whereas, if I am not mistaken, there seems to be some reticence or disagreement within the Council.
I would be extremely happy if you could dispel this doubt, for I am sure that all will then proceed very quickly.
I can give you the Council position, which is that, in general, the current situation regarding fraud in the area of both indirect and direct taxes and the possibility of stepping up administrative cooperation in these areas were discussed quite recently at the Ecofin Council meeting of 5 June 2000.
On this occasion, a report from an ad hoc group on combating tax fraud commissioned by Coreper on 8 September 1999 was referred to the Council.
This report shows, as you quite rightly state, that tax fraud within the Community has reached worrying levels.
All the Member States have confirmed their determination to intensify the fight against fraud both internally and in their relations with others.
The Council has asked the Commission to present at the earliest possible opportunity proposals based on all the recommendations which met with unanimous agreement in the course of the work of the ad hoc group.
This also refers to measures which might be undertaken in order to solve the specific problems of excise fraud.
This is the context in which I informed you that, without my being aware of any particular disagreement, the Commission has worked to this end and I think you might therefore safely ask questions of the Commission without fear of any divergence of opinions with the Council.
Are you under the impression that the Member States now have the means to achieve the objectives?
I tend to feel that we need to put a lot more Community power behind the fight against fraud, and I think that the coordination between the Member States has failed to come up with the goods so far.
Will the new measures do the trick?
You are right, the fight against fraud is never sufficiently well developed.
As you know, over the years we have set up various instruments which are starting to work, but I quite agree that this is a fight which we must wage ceaselessly.
This is what we should be striving for.
Question No 4 by (H-0881/00):
Subject: Increased carrier's liability The French Presidency has proposed in Council that carrier's liability be increased.
This would mean that a carrier, for example an airline, would be penalised if it brought persons without valid visa or identity papers into the EU.
In many Member States carrier's liability requires the carrier to arrange or pay for immediate return of the persons concerned, combined in some countries with fines.
The Presidency now wishes to introduce mandatory fines.
Carrier's liability is an effective method of preventing asylum seekers from reaching the EU.
Many refugees with grounds for seeking asylum cannot obtain the passports or visas required for entry into the EU.
Carrier's liability means that their requests for asylum cannot be examined in the EU.
Instead they are dealt with by airline, airport and other transport staff.
Does the Council consider that the latter are competent in practice to decide the future of asylum seekers?
The proposal the honourable Member refers to is an initiative from the French Presidency with a view to the adoption of a Council directive on the harmonisation of financial penalties imposed on carriers transporting third country nationals to Member States' territory without the necessary documents for entry.
This text, which was presented to the European Parliament for consultation on 6 September 2000, is currently being examined by the competent Council bodies.
The aim of this initiative is to implement a European-wide coherent policy against illegal immigration and the trafficking of human beings, which is a real scourge.
Increasing carrier liability is one of the essential aspects of this.
Moreover the proposed directive introduces a minimum instrument common to all Member States regarding carrier liability, setting requirements for checks to be carried out by carriers and harmonising the penalties currently laid down by Member States.
It is not a matter of establishing new penalties against carriers but rather of harmonising those already provided for under the terms of the Schengen Convention.
I should like to draw the honourable Member' s attention to the fact that recital 3 of the draft directive does indeed stipulate that application thereof shall not be prejudicial to the commitments arising under the Geneva Convention of 28 July 1951 relating to the Status of Refugees, as amended by the New York Protocol of 31 January 1967.
The European Union has, on many occasions, stated its absolute respect for the right of asylum.
This has to be reconciled with effective action to combat illegal immigration and the trafficking of human beings.
This is imperative and is something that was explicitly called for at the Feira European Council following the tragic events in Dover.
Mr President, I want to thank the French minister for his answer.
I nonetheless believe that the proposal tabled by the French Presidency is completely unacceptable and that it really has only one aim, namely to keep asylum seekers out of the EU, something which may in practice lead to an increase in illegal immigration.
It is also the case that it is not only refugees under the Geneva Convention who may be granted asylum but also significantly larger groups.
These groups are obviously not excluded under the new proposal.
I also asked a specific question concerning the powers of airline and airport employees to make actual decisions on asylum matters.
If it is true that those who are regarded as refugees under the Geneva Convention are to be excluded, what actual powers do check-in staff at an airport in Istanbul possess to decide a refugee' s fate, for that is what this issue is about.
I think it is a very relevant question because the fate of refugees is being placed in the hands of, for example, airline and airport staff.
In my opinion, such staff are not competent and are lacking in training in this area, and it is therefore basically irresponsible to give them this power.
That is more a statement of opinion than a question.
I would repeat that we are bound to take effective action against this scourge which has given rise to tragic events, and we must do so while ensuring that the European Union continues to respect the right of asylum entirely.
Let me stress that: absolute respect.
Individual countries may have problems. We are working on that.
It is up to that country to voice its concerns.
This is, however, I believe, the road we must take.
Thank you for your answer.
I should like to ask the following supplementary question. How major and extensive does the Council consider this problem to be, and how seriously does the Council view the fact that transport companies organise travel to the EU for persons without valid visa and identity papers?
That is precisely the question which I was attempting to answer.
Let me repeat that it is a subject of the utmost, the very utmost gravity.
Question No 5 by (H-0882/00):
Subject: Everything but arms proposal Is the Council content that this proposal from the Commission - which may well have dire consequences for already hard-pressed sugar beet farmers in the European Union - should be passed without any consultation of the directly-elected European Parliament?
The proposal for a Council regulation amending Council Regulation (EC) 2820/98 so as to extend duty-free access without any quantitative restrictions to products originating in the least-developed countries, which the Commission put forward recently, is the result of Community initiatives to improve market access for the least developed countries.
In this respect, the ACP-EC partnership agreement signed in Cotonou in June 2000 stipulates that the European Community shall by 2005, at the latest, allow duty free access for essentially all products from all LDCs.
In view of the ongoing reform of the common organisation of the market in sugar, rice and bananas, the Commission proposal stipulates that market access for such countries will be gradually liberalised over a period of three years from January 2001.
The proposal provides for granting products from LDCs duty free access, amending the generalised tariff preference scheme currently implemented by the Community.
Insofar as this proposal relates to common trade policy, it is covered by Article 133 of the Treaty, which does not call for the European Parliament to be consulted.
I can assure you, nonetheless, that the Council is examining this proposal with a great deal of interest, and is in particular looking into the potential implications for Community producers of the proposed duty free access and into whether this proposal is consistent with ongoing plans to reform the common organisation of the market in certain industries such as sugar, for example.
Last month when I asked a supplementary question in Question Time, this President-in-Office simply avoided giving me a supplementary by saying: "I can only repeat my previous answer" and reading out the previous answer again.
This time I will give him a chance not to read out the previous answer but ask him for an undertaking and an agreement.
Does the President-in-Office agree that there should be no decision made on this proposal until there has been a full impact assessment of the effect on the Union, the ACP countries and the LDC countries?
Yes or no?
The Presidency and a number of Member States have already received various letters from the Comité européen des fabricants de sucre (European Committee of Sugar Manufacturers) regarding the Commission' s proposals, which they will take into account in their deliberations.
The real impact of the duty free access proposed for European producers will be a key factor in the Council' s final decision.
I should like to repeat a question which I asked Mr Moscovici last week in plenary.
Perhaps he had too many questions to deal with to be able to answer me then.
Perhaps you could answer me in these more intimate surroundings this evening.
It is about the role of the European Parliament's in-trade policy, which is the spirit of Mr Newton Dunn's question.
Do you think that it will be possible for you, me or anybody in Europe to advocate greater transparency and accountability in the WTO in-trade policy as long as this place has no formal and serious role in scrutinising and vetting trade policy decisions taken by the Council of Ministers and the European Commission?
To cite my dear friend, Mr Newton Dunn, perhaps the best way to answer this is: yes or no.
I should just like to make you see, on this, my last visit here, what the point of this exercise actually is.
The Presidency is not here to express the opinions of any given individual or any given government but rather to state what the position of the Council is at any moment 'x' or time 't' .
So, while I may have my own personal opinions as a political leader - and I do have opinions on the subject, believe me - I shall confine myself to expressing the Council' s current position.
You mentioned the Cotonou Agreement.
Are you aware that the Cotonou Agreement also expresses a commitment to undertaking impact studies which might affect non-LDC countries as well as to have consultation?
Neither of those two things has happened.
It is not good enough to have consultation after the events.
Are you aware that apart from sugar producers in Europe, concerns are being expressed, especially by countries that are commodity-dependent - particularly in the Caribbean - on sugar, bananas and rice, as you have mentioned?
I can assure all the Members of the European Parliament who have asked me questions that the Council will take their comments into consideration.
As they deal with the same subject, the following two questions will be taken together:
Question No 7 by (H-0932/00):
Subject: Immediate danger from bovine spongiform encephalopathy The continuing cases of 'mad cow' disease have made consumers, as well as livestock producers, extremely worried.
The decisions taken by the recent Agriculture Council enraged the citizens of the Member States, whose health is being jeopardised by continuing consumption of meat that is unfit to eat.
When does the Council intend to take effective measures to protect consumer health by changing organisational methods and development conditions for livestock rearing, through the use of livestock feed containing protein of plant origin, such as legumes, through radical reform of the CAP, a ban on beef exports from France and any other countries where a similar problem appears, universal inspection of cattle and a ban on the production and use of meat meals for feeding ruminants?
The Council wishes to point out that its policy is always to afford consumers the highest possible level of protection.
In particular it has sought, by means of its recent decisions, to ensure that the meat available to consumers is guaranteed to the maximum in this respect, especially by means of its decision with a view to guaranteeing the improved traceability of the origin of meat and elimination from the food chain of a list of specified at-risk materials, which now includes bovine intestines.
As a precautionary measure and in order to eliminate risks of cross-contamination, the Council has decided to suspend, as of 1 January 2001, the use of meat meals in feedingstuffs for production animals.
Finally, non-tested animals aged above thirty months may no longer enter the food chain.
A purchase and destruction system is to be set up for such non-tested bovine animals, in order to compensate livestock farmers at the market price.
The Council considers that this package of measures should make it possible to avoid the risk which the honourable Members have decried.
Regarding the method of organisation and the criteria for the development of livestock farming, the Council would point out that, in the context of its decisions taken under the Agenda 2000 reform, emphasis has been placed on greater incentives for extensive production, particularly by means of bonuses.
Furthermore, on 4 December 2000, the Council noted the Commission statements on the cultivation of protein-rich crops and called upon this institution to look more deeply into this matter in the near future and to draw conclusions with reference to current policy in this sector and with regard to set-aside, including, if necessary, by presenting appropriate proposals.
The Council' s objective in all these decisions is to restore consumer confidence within the European Union.
However, in consideration of the need to uphold the principles governing the internal market, it aims to favour Community-wide measures over measures concerning specific Member States.
First of all I have to say that, in my opinion, the President-in-Office of the Council has not yet answered Mr Korakas' question.
Secondly, and with regard to my specific question, I thank the President-in-Office of the Council very much for his answer.
I think that the Council has been bold and has been quick to take some important measures.
However, we are faced with the very serious problem of the failure to comply with the measures agreed.
The Council knows that in 1989, both the production of feed with animal proteins for feeding ruminants in the United Kingdom and for the production of meat meals were banned.
This indicates that the measures that we adopted at the time were good and have guarantees.
But our problem is that they are not applied, that there is fraud in fulfilling them.
I would therefore like to ask the President-in-Office of the Council if the Council of Ministers is going to give guarantees that the Community rules will be complied with, if it is going to give guarantees that the existing measures banning meat meals are going to be complied with.
Which inspectors are going to deal with it?
What checks are going to be made?
Is this a concern that has been latent in the Council of Ministers?
Answer me please, specifically: what food safety guarantees are going to be given that all these measures are to be applied?
Mrs Izquierdo Rojo, I have outlined the decisions that the Council has taken.
As you yourself stated, these are bold decisions of recent date, the latest of these being from 4 December, that is a week ago.
The French Presidency has, from the very outset, been concerned to bring about a European response to this crisis, which is a crisis in terms of foodstuffs, society and health.
Right up to the end, the presidency has stressed and urged that measures be taken, and you may be sure that when France resumes its position as a simple member of the European Union at the end of the presidency, it will continue to stress that this must be done.
At any event there is now, I believe, a general increase in awareness throughout Europe which will enable whatever measures necessary to be taken in order to combat this disease.
I wanted to ask if there has been an evaluation of the measures that have been taken.
I tend to feel that if drastic measures had been taken earlier, we would not be facing such a disastrous situation now.
Is that how the Council sees it?
As you know, we continually act according to the latest state of our knowledge, and so I cannot completely endorse this analysis.
I believe, moreover, that we should improve our knowledge, and that is also the point of establishing a European food safety authority, on which the Nice European Council took a decision in principle at last week' s meeting.
This authority must now be set up, and I think the European authorities have now become very aware of the issue, and that we must forge ahead.
Mrs Maes, I am told - for none of us knows the Rules of Procedures off by heart - that you were not entitled to ask this second question because the Members are only entitled to ask one supplementary question during Question Time.
As the author is not present, Question No 8 by Mrs McKenna lapses.
My understanding is that the services were told two days ago that I would be taking over the question for Mrs McKenna because we knew then that she would have to go back to Dublin on urgent business.
I have not been informed of this by any of the assistants and I cannot accept the proposal made now.
Question No 9 by Olivier Dupuis (H-0890/00):
Subject: Algerian ban on WAFA party
The international press reports that the Algerian Minister for Internal Affairs, Mr Yazid Zerhouni, refuses - in violation of the procedures provided in law for setting up political associations and parties - to recognise the WAFA party led by the former minister, Ahmed Taleb, which has been set up in full compliance with current legislation.
This party, which aims to reconcile Islam and the modern world and which could make a significant contribution towards reviving the country's ailing democracy and, therefore, strengthening the rule of law, finds itself subjected to a ban on the well-worn pretext that it would represent 'a threat to State security'.
What initiatives has the Council taken, or will it take, to persuade the Algerian authorities to respect their own laws and thereby also promote the revival of democratic debate and the political process, thus enabling Algeria to emerge from the serious crisis in which it finds itself?
Under the Barcelona process, Algeria endorsed a number of principles including respect for the rule of law.
The Presidency Conclusions adopted at the end of the fourth Euro-Mediterranean Conference in Marseilles on 15 and 16 November 2000 explicitly mention the need to boost political dialogue among the 27 members, including at ministerial level, particularly on the following subjects: the process of consolidating the rule of law and respect for human rights and democratic principles.
The bilateral political dialogue which the European Union is conducting with Algeria does indeed focus on the objectives you stressed in your question, i.e. restoring debate and a democratic political dynamic.
In fact, three years ago, the European Union initiated this kind of political dialogue at ministerial level on the basis of specific guidelines: firstly, condemnation of violence and terrorism, solidarity with the Algerian people, the need for the Algerian authorities to undertake political and economic reforms, the need for dialogue between the government and the opposition, the European Union' s goodwill with regard to developing relations and cooperation with Algeria, and, finally, the wish to see an open comprehensive political process implemented in Algeria.
These are the initiatives which the Council has taken or intends to take with regard to the Algerian authorities.
I can assure you that the European Union intends to continue and step up its political dialogue with the Algerian authorities, especially involving the ministerial troika.
Has the Presidency representative, in this instance the French Ambassador to Algeria, actually met Mr Ahmed Taleb?
Have either the French Ambassador or other Council leaders initiated talks with the Algerian authorities in order to ascertain how they might get around this situation?
According to the information I have, I just wish to state that the European Union did indeed initiate political dialogue at ministerial level in 1997 and that, in principle, the French Presidency is to have a meeting between the troika of ministers and Algeria, but as yet no date has been set.
As far as I know, the Council has never so far discussed the matter of refusal to recognise the WAFA party or issued any statement.
I am told that it was noted within the working party that this measure indicated a power struggle within the Algerian administration.
As you can see, I do not have any inside information or, unfortunately, any more specific information.
I, or rather the Council, will answer your second question in writing.
Question No 10 by (H-0892/00):
Subject: UN special session on children The UN General Assembly's Special Session on Children, in September 2001, will discuss the situation of children world-wide, and consider adopting a new plan of action to make children's rights a reality across the world.
Would the Council outline its policy priorities for the UN General Assembly Special Session on Children?
Does the Council intend to consult widely with civil society organisations, as requested by the UN Secretary-General, in the setting of its future policy priorities for children, both within the European Union and in the developing world?
. (FR) I have already had the opportunity, a few weeks ago, to express my comments to you on the preparations for the UN General Assembly Special Session devoted to reviewing the results of the World Summit for Children which is to take place in September 2001.
At that time I stressed the importance of preparing thoroughly for this event and the truly fundamental role which the European Union should play in these preparations.
Consequently, on 20 November 2000 last, on the anniversary of the adoption of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the ministers of the Members States with responsibility for matters relating to children and a Commission representative met in Paris and adopted shared commitments which will contribute to enhancing European Union action in making preparations for this special session.
I should like to answer your first question and inform you of the political priorities we identified as part of our preparations.
The chief objective of the special session will be to renew the international community' s commitments to children' s rights and children' s welfare.
To this end, an assessment of the last ten years must be made with regard to the commitments and objectives set at the World Summit.
The commitments expressed in the Millennium Declaration, which complement the World Summit, should also be taken fully into account.
These commitments concern access to education, reducing maternal mortality and under-five child mortality, and combating transmissible diseases, especially AIDS.
As regards your second question, the Council is in complete agreement with the point of view of the General Secretary of the United Nations that all the institutions concerned and also experts, research bodies or academic institutions which have a special interest in children' s issues should be involved in this exercise.
The involvement of non-governmental organisations in the preparatory process and in the special session would seem to us to be a basic condition to making this meeting a real success.
We welcome the arrangements proposed in this respect by the Preparatory Committee and adopted by the General Assembly regarding procedures for the registration of non-governmental organisations for involvement in the preparatory process and the Special Session in September 2001.
We are in constant liaison with the representatives of the non-governmental organisations, including by means of seminars.
In the course of such exchanges, we have benefited from their experience and their commitment to children.
We can congratulate the French presidency on taking this initiative to prepare for the UN special session.
You obviously have made a commitment to involving civil society.
Will you also make a commitment to actually consulting children, since the events involve them?
I hope that their views will also be sought in the months ahead.
Secondly, it is also the case that while many Member States are very active on the issue of children's rights it is actually much more difficult in a European Union context to be as proactive.
What progress do you think we might make in securing a legal base for the European Union's work with children and the promotion of children's rights?
. (FR) Indeed, Mrs Kinnock, Sweden is also going to organise a conference on refugee children in Stockholm in the spring of 2001.
Question No 11 by (H-0894/00):
Subject: Turkey's obligations under EU-Turkey partnership arrangements In its proposal regarding partnership arrangements between the EU and Turkey, the Commission indicates that the European Council is to re-examine the situation regarding unresolved differences, particularly with regard to their impact on accession procedures, so as to help ensure that they can be resolved within the International Court of Justice before the end of 2004 at the latest.
In its own resolution (A5-0297/2000, Minutes of European Parliament Sittings of 15 November 2000), the European Parliament also points out that the judgment of the European Court of Human Rights in 'Loïzidou v Turkey' (No. 15318/89) has not yet been implemented and calls on the Turkish Government to comply with the decisions of the European Court of Human Rights.
Does the Council intend to include in provisions regarding partnership arrangements stipulations regarding acceptance by Turkey of the jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice at the Hague and compliance by Turkey with the decisions of the European Court of Human Rights, in accordance with the unanimous wishes of the Council of Europe?
Yes, political agreement was reached within the General Affairs Council regarding the text of the accession partnership agreement for Turkey and on the framework regulation which defines its principles and conditions.
The Presidency is very pleased with this result, which marks a significant stage in the implementation of the pre-accession strategy for Turkey defined last year in Helsinki.
The Council has not radically changed the initial Commission proposal as adopted by the Commission on 8 November 2000.
There have just been some amendments to the priorities relating to political criteria and to reinforced political dialogue.
Regarding the reference to the jurisdiction of the European Court of Human Rights, there has been no change to the Commission proposal.
The partnership agreement contains a number of references to the European Convention on Human Rights.
In addition, it stresses the need to enhance the legal avenues for remedying human rights violations.
It moreover stresses the importance it attaches to improving the judicial apparatus and the training of Turkish magistrates, particularly in the field of human rights.
Regarding the peaceful settlement of disputes, the text of the accession partnership agreement points out, in accordance with the conclusions of the Helsinki European Council, that this issue is an important matter, to be dealt with in the context of the political dialogue between the European Union and Turkey.
Like the other candidate countries, Turkey must make every effort to resolve any outstanding border disputes.
I thank the Minister for his reply.
This question was submitted while the issue of the partnership was still pending.
I appreciate how tiring the past days must have been and I shall therefore focus my second question on the subject of the Loïzidou case, i.e. the judgment against Turkey by the Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg in the matter of the seizure of the property of Greek Cypriots in the occupied section of the island.
The Loïzidou case has already given rise to two judgements against Turkey.
Does the Council intend to discuss this issue with the Turkish Government within the context of this partnership which you have referred to?
. (FR) I have quite simply pointed out, Mr Alavanos, the general and specific conditions under which this accession partnership agreement was adopted.
This is the context in which negotiations with the candidate country will be going ahead. We have accepted its candidacy and now we have specific requirements and expectations of that country.
As the author is not present, Question No 12 by Mrs Karamanou lapses.
Question No 13 by (H-0897/00):
Subject: Fundamental rights and justice With reference to Mr Moscovici' s answer to my question and supplementary question of 14 November (H-0854/00), it remains entirely obscure why the Council thinks that the implementation of the principle of mutual recognition of judgments will in itself do anything to secure due fulfilment of the guarantees contained in Articles 5 and 6 of the European Convention on Human Rights, now repeated in Articles 48 and 49 of the Charter.
I refer to guarantees such as the right to defend oneself in person or through legal assistance of one' s own choosing or, if one has not sufficient means to pay for legal assistance, to be given it free when the interests of justice so require; to have the free assistance of an interpreter if one cannot understand or speak the language used in court; right to trial within a reasonable time, or to release pending trial.
With regard to individual cases such as those mentioned in my supplementary question, how can the Council claim that a process of mutual recognition will of itself make any improvement at all?
. (FR) As the Council has emphasised to the honourable Member in the previous answer, the process of the mutual recognition of judgements will afford better protection of individuals' rights.
The mutual recognition of judgements will in fact make it possible to better guarantee personal security as it will facilitate the fight against crime on European Union territory by improving judicial cooperation.
In the long term, the conduct of inquiries and the prosecution of offences will cease to suffer from the limitations due to the diversity of national legal systems.
Next, mutual recognition affords improved legal safety within the European Union in that as it ensures that a judgement pronounced in one State will not be called into question in another Member State.
This is application of the non bis in idem principle: the same case may not be retried, final judgements cannot be called into question.
This is a very important aspect of the protection of individuals.
It seems to me, with great respect, President, that the Council has yet again failed or refused to address the particular problem which I asked it to address.
Last time Council might have claimed it lacked notice of that question.
This time I put essentially the same point for the second time in one month and hope for some kind of an answer.
Citizens of this Union are detained pending trial for totally unacceptable periods of time, their detention is extended and extended.
This occurs particularly in Longuenesse jail in France and applies to truck drivers from the United Kingdom and other countries.
I find it wholly unacceptable that this problem should be simply swept under the carpet, and we are assured that the mutual recognition of judgments will help in some way.
I want to know why this question, this very plain and simple question, is not being answered.
Are the rights of defence being adequately honoured and will mutual recognition do anything to help?
Let me give you the Council' s interpretation of your question, and its answer.
Regarding the specific cases you mentioned, mutual recognition will not lead to validation of a judgement which flouts essential rights such as the right to legal representation of one' s own choice or the right to the free assistance of an interpreter.
On the one hand, these are rights which all the States have endorsed and which constitute the shared foundation of our criminal justice systems, and, on the other hand, mutual recognition is a process which is by no means automatic and which depends on the nature of the judgement in question.
So, as the Council stated in its previous answer, the programme for mutual recognition can only bring improvements in terms of fundamental rights.
Mr President, I have to say that the President-in-Office is turning not answering questions into something of an art form.
I would like to press him further.
What will the Council do to ensure that the states do the kinds of things he has just been setting out?
What guarantee do we have, that the theory that you have just stated will actually take place?
I have no further information to give you.
I think we simply have a little misunderstanding here.
What I am in fact trying to explain to you is that the Council is indeed taking action to meet your expectations.
Question No 14 by (H-0899/00):
Subject: Mandate of the Rapid Reaction Force An EU rapid reaction force is currently being set up.
What has been decided about the mandate on the basis of which these troops will be deployed, and for what purposes will they be deployed?
It is up to the Council to decide upon the possible launch of a military operation conducted by the European Union as part of the Petersberg assignment.
In accordance with Article 23 of the Treaty on European Union, the Council shall adopt this decision unanimously, as is the case, moreover, for any other decision with implications in the area of defence.
It is, furthermore, up to each Member State to take a sovereign decision at national level whether or not to commit their national forces to the operation.
The Nice European Council recorded the conditions which might lead the Council to take a decision in a crisis situation.
According to these, with a view to setting up an operation, the Political and Security Committee (COPS) may submit a recommendation to the Council on the basis of advice from the Military Committee.
The Council, whose deliberations are prepared by COREPER according to the customary procedures, may take a decision on the basis of this.
The decision to launch an operation would, in principle, take the form of a joint action.
The COPS, as the kingpin of European security and defence policy and the CFSP, has a central role in defining the European Union' s response to a crisis.
In particular, it provides the political scrutiny and strategic administration of a military crisis management operation.
The option of deploying a rapid reaction force exists for the whole range of crisis management missions, the Petersberg missions as defined in Article 17(2) of the Treaty on European Union, humanitarian and evacuation missions, peacekeeping missions and combat troop missions for crisis management, including peacemaking missions.
Mr President, Minister, I would like to ask if any decisions of principle have been taken regarding whether there should be a mandate from the UN or any other international organisation in discharging such tasks as these, as, under international law, a mandate from an international organisation is needed before any country' s territory can legally be attacked in this way.
Furthermore, I would ask what sort of legal definition has been presented or made in the Council regarding tasks connected with the deployment of crisis management troops?
There is a report available which was appended to the Presidency' s report at the Nice European Council on European security and defence policy.
This will give Mr Seppänen all the answers he requires.
It is a rather long document, but all the information is laid out there in precise detail.
As the authors are not present, Questions Nos 15 to 21 lapse.
Question No 22 by (H-0918/00):
Subject: Bearing of taxes on the operation of the internal market In an article in the Financial Times in November this year, the Commission President, Mr Prodi, affirmed that he does not want to see tax harmonisation and common tax levels in the EU by stating that tax rates 'are in the hands of the national parliaments and must remain so'.
At the same time, in the same article, he considers that, in order for the EU to become dynamic and competitive, there is a need to switch to majority voting on taxes 'where necessary for the internal market to function'.
Which taxes does the Council consider to have no bearing on the dynamic and competitive operation of the internal market?
With your permission, Mr President, that will be the last question that I shall be able to answer during this Question Time.
The honourable Member' s question concerns the unofficial opinions expressed by the Commission President.
It is not therefore up to the Council to state an opinion on this matter.
I should just like to point out that the Treaty system differentiates between taxes and indirect taxes which must be harmonised in order to ensure the proper establishment and smooth running of the internal market - according to Article 93 - and the approximation, laid down in Article 94, of legislation which has a direct bearing on the establishment or running of the common market, including legislation on direct taxation.
The decisions taken by the Council on the basis of Articles 93 and 94 were taken according to the rule of unanimity.
Following the Treaty of Nice they will, unfortunately, continue to be taken according to the rule of unanimity.
I should like to thank the French presidency for its answer.
I nonetheless want to ask whether the Council welcomes this type of very contradictory and unclear statement from the Commission' s President.
It is nevertheless the case that, if the desire is to create close cooperation between the Council, Parliament and the Commission, it is unfortunate if the Commission' s President produces vague statements of this kind, for his statement can only be interpreted in terms of his wanting to open the way to tax harmonisation despite creating a smokescreen for this.
I must repeat that I cannot comment on statements attributed to the President of the Commission.
However, the matter of whether decisions on taxation should be taken by majority vote was examined in the context of the Intergovernmental Conference.
As you know, it was not possible, unfortunately, to make any progress in this area at Nice.
Question Nos 23 to 32 will be answered in writing.
That concludes Question Time.
(The sitting was suspended at 7 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m.)
Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the Republic of Croatia
The next item is the report (A5-0364/2000) by Mr Baltas, on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy, on the Commission report on the feasibility of negotiating a Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the Republic of Croatia [COM(2000) 311 - C5-0506/2000 - 2000/2244(COS)]
Mr President, I have great pleasure in presenting the report on the Stabilisation and Association Agreement between Croatia and the European Union to this part session of the European Parliament.
Croatia has made considerable progress in the economic, the political and the social sector and the Stabilisation and Association Agreement is the next logical step.
Allow me briefly to summarise these three main sectors.
First, the economic sector. Obviously, huge efforts are still needed before the Croatian market functions in line with the acquis communautaire.
However, efforts are clearly being made and the results of structural and economic reform can already be seen, especially in the transparent procedures being used for privatisation and the protection being offered to foreign investment.
The Stability, or rather Stabilisation and Association Agreement, which provides for financial aid and general financial assistance through the relevant Community programmes, will strengthen this progress in the economic sector and speed up preparations for Croatia's accession to the European Union at a later date.
The progress made by Croatia is evident not only in the economic sector but also in the political sector.
The new coalition voted in during recent elections in Croatia has decided to put its money on democracy and the rule of law.
This embracing of democracy and the rule of law go beyond mere words to daily actions: institutions are being created and legislation - such as the legislation on protection for refugees, the right to asylum and immigration - is being reformed.
Also worth mentioning here are the attempt by certain representatives of the Croat community in Bosnia to destabilise the government in order to recreate the wartime statelet of Herzeg-Bosna and the government's compliance with the terms of the Dayton agreement and collaboration with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia.
Progress has clearly also been made in the social sector and at this point, I need do no more than read you an extract from the conclusions of the Council of Europe:
"Croatia has made significant progress in fulfilling its commitments as a member of the international community, in particular with its ratification of the European Convention on Human Rights, the European Convention for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities, the European Charter of Local Self-Government and the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages."
With the changes and democratic developments in Yugoslavia, the Stabilisation and Association Agreement between the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and the European Union and the present motion for a resolution on the Stabilisation and Association Agreement with Croatia, there are good prospects for democratisation and stabilisation in the Western Balkans and Croatia can play a specific and decisive role here.
The Stabilisation and Association Agreement between the European Union and the Republic of Croatia has come along at just the right time.
Parliament also has cause to congratulate itself on rushing approval through before the end of the year.
Just how right it was is confirmed by the summit in Nice which ended just yesterday morning.
The following is an extract from the chapter describing the Western Balkans:
"The Zagreb Summit of 24 November, which brought together for the first time countries in the region which had returned to democracy, welcomed the historic changes which have occurred in the Western Balkans, initially in Croatia and then in the FRY. ...
It confirms that the process of stabilisation and association is at the heart of the Union' s policy vis-à-vis the five countries concerned, which each receive individual treatment."
Mr President, the report on the Stabilisation and Association Agreement takes account of the new democratic developments in Croatia and highlights the European prospects for this country, which has managed in the course of the past year to achieve its aim of joining the international community of states.
Its membership of the NATO Partnership for Peace and of the World Trade Organisation, its bilateral agreements with the EFTA states, its free-trade agreements with the CEFTA member states and the negotiations that began recently, on 8 November, on a wide-ranging Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the European Union are all evidence that Croatia has embarked on a clear change of course since the elections of 3 January 2000.
The European Union emphasised this again by the summit held in Zagreb on 24 November.
However, it also became clear at this summit that the situation inside Yugoslavia remains as brittle and strife-ridden as ever.
If this pattern of behaviour continues, where in case of doubt each party fights the other, it could break up the Stability Pact for South-East Europe, which is based on regional cooperation.
For even now states like Croatia are asking whether the obligation to cooperate on a regional basis might not end up delaying their own accession to Europe.
Croatia, like a more democratic Serbia, where I hope that democracy will be consolidated on 23 December, could become major factors of stability in these regions destroyed by wars and ethnic conflicts.
It is important for the European Union, as also the European Parliament, to do their utmost to provide economic protection and support for the democratic process in these countries.
Even if they still have a long way to go before they can join the European Union, economic and political help quite simply offer the principle of hope, and Mr Baltas' report takes that principle into account.
But we should also apply the principle of differentiation in this region.
Croatia has made significant progress, especially by ratifying the European Convention on Human Rights, the European Convention for the Prevention of Torture, the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities and the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages.
The European Parliament's report rightly notes that.
Another point in Croatia's favour is the changed attitude of the newly elected Croatian authorities to the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia.
Croatia has always felt part of western Europe, western culture.
It needs all our support and encouragement along its chosen road to economic and political reform.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, we too can answer yes to the question whether Croatia deserves a Stability and Association Agreement.
Croatia is increasingly becoming a factor of stability in the region.
It is making positive progress towards democracy.
However, let me emphasise that even though we welcome this progress, this does not mean we think Croatia has reached its goal.
It must now take the next steps towards legislative reform, especially in relation to minority rights, freedom of the press and an independent judiciary.
It is up to the Commission to take a very critical look at precisely these aspects now in preparation for the Stability and Association Agreement.
Let me also stress that Croatia is endeavouring to put its relations with neighbouring states in good order.
That means it really has made quite positive progress here.
It is particularly important to show Croatia that we regard it as quite crucial what role it takes on with regard to stabilisation in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Federation there.
Indeed, that is the precisely the yardstick by which we must measure Croatia's progress towards stabilisation.
I think it would be a disaster for the EU to tie economic support to an agreement on the return of the refugees in the Association and Stabilisation Agreement.
That issue must be based on other conditions, namely whether access to asylum in Croatia is compatible with international standards and whether it is a humane access to asylum.
I believe this question has to be treated separately and must not be part of the agreement.
Mr President, our Group supports the work done by Mr Baltas on the report on the feasibility of negotiating stabilisation and association agreements with the Republic of Croatia.
We also think that the Commission has acted at the appropriate time to launch this proposal.
We think that the work has been done in record time, and we congratulate Mr Baltas on his efficient work in committee.
We think that it is timely because, although at the time, we, as the European left, criticised some countries of Western Europe for their role in the break up of the former Yugoslavia, through encouraging, facilitating or instigating hatred and aggression, both ethnic and of other kinds, which resulted in the emergence of Croatia, at this time, when its recent past has also changed, I think it is a very good sign that the European Union is taking a step forward to help recover the mood of tolerance, democracy, respect for human rights and living in harmony with other republics and areas in the region, because it is of vital importance for the European Union.
We should not forget the suffering of the almost three hundred thousand people, of Serbian origin, who were violently expelled in a week, by terrorist methods, from Krajina, and had to flee to Serbia.
I think it is important to recognise that it was wrong and that those people be helped to return, if they wish, to their homes.
That would prove that tolerance, living together in harmony and respect for different opinions are possible in the Balkan region and it would improve the prospects for our future in the area.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I particularly welcome the start of the negotiations on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement, which will at last open up the prospect that country deserves.
Unlike its neighbour Slovenia, immediately after independence in 1991 Croatia was not able to develop in a way as to allow it to become a candidate for accession at this point.
For at the time, in 1991, one third of the country was occupied. At the time the Croats were driven out.
In 1991/92 more than 250 000 Croats were expelled from Kraijina, from western and eastern Slavonia.
They were not able to return to their homes until the, to my mind, justified­ recapture of these areas.
There they found their property and possessions in ruins.
Unfortunately, during this recapture Serbs who had the right to live there were expelled in return, not just by the Croats but sadly also by their Serb ringleaders, who, of course, did the same in Bosnia and Herzegovina and in Sarajevo.
Unfortunately, we also saw serious attacks carried out during this recapture.
But we should not confuse cause and effect.
We then punished Croatia for this recapture by denying it our friendship.
We refused to grant it any aid.
And because we refused to help, many things then started to go wrong in Croatia, with wrongful privatisation, corruption and so on.
The new government has now taken a European line in many policy areas. It is seeking to cooperate with The Hague.
It has stopped supporting separatist movements in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is currently adopting difficult austerity measures in order to meet the preconditions.
So I believe Croatia has deserved this support. It can become a factor of stability throughout the region.
Mr President, during the years when I was President of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe, I had the opportunity to support many Croatians in their efforts towards the freedom and prosperity that they, like other peoples on our continent, identified with their integration into the European institutions.
In the 20th Century, Croatia has gone through the same stages that many of us that are now part of the European Union had to go through.
In the last 60 years, Croatia experienced a particularly awful form of fascism.
A fascism like that in Germany, Austria, Italy and Spain: a characteristically European path, therefore.
Then the Croats, through a particularly militant anti-fascist resistance, freed themselves from Nazism.
This journey of resistance is part of the best of European heritage.
After a new and long period of authoritarianism came the outbreak of independence, led by nationalist forces and others based more on purely democratic aspirations.
In the struggle between them the Croatians had to go through a new chapter of ultra-nationalist authoritarianism, supported paradoxically by their Serbian counterparts, through the occupation of part of their territory and through the war.
With peace and the consolidation of democracy, the Croatian people have chosen the path of moderation and tolerance, freedom and respect.
And they have clearly identified that choice with their full participation in the project for European construction.
The entry of Croatia into the Council of Europe made a decisive contribution to the positive developments that have been taking place in the country, and was a step further along the road to the stabilisation and association agreement with the European Union, which we are debating today and which we want to become a reality as soon as possible.
This agreement is nothing if not a step further towards Croatia' s accession as a full member of the European Union, and there is no place on that path for any conditions other than those that the other applicant countries have to comply with.
The Croatians have a right to that accession, but, moreover, I think it is obvious that the European project would be incomplete as long as Croatia was missing from the mosaic, along with its other neighbours from the former Yugoslavia.
We will therefore vote in favour of the proposals put forward by our friend Mr Baltas and we commit ourselves to continuing to support Croatia in its efforts to become one more member of the European Union.
Mr President, I am delighted to be able to comment on the excellent report by the honourable gentleman, Mr Baltas - produced, as several honourable gentlemen have said, with considerable expedition - on the Commission's feasibility study for a stabilisation and association agreement with Croatia.
This has of course been a historic year for south-east Europe.
It was Croatia - we should not forget - that got things moving with its elections under a year ago.
So I am delighted that we celebrate the end of the year by launching negotiations with Croatia for a stabilisation and association agreement.
We initiated those negotiations appropriately enough at the Zagreb Summit a fortnight ago and the first full negotiating session takes place on Monday in Brussels.
We hope to make swift progress in these negotiations and to be able to conclude them rapidly.
How rapidly depends to some extent not just on us but on the Croatian negotiating team who are extremely well prepared.
I have to say that, on the basis of Croatia's performance this year, I have every confidence that we will be able to set a brisk pace.
Certainly that is what Croatia has done during the course of the last months: setting an example to its neighbours, demonstrating how rapidly it is possible to turn a country's political fortunes around, given sufficient vision and political courage.
I want to pay a warm tribute to Croatia's leaders and to her people for what they have achieved.
Croatia has, for example, bravely transformed its relations with The Hague, based on the wise assertion of her President that it is only by establishing individual guilt that a country can truly be absolved of collective guilt.
Wise advice, applicable not just in Croatia but wherever war crimes are alleged.
As Mrs Stenzel pointed out, Croatia has joined the PFP and WTO, and it has taken on a host of other international obligations.
The new government has made radical changes to Croatia's relations with Bosnia and Herzegovina, clearly distancing itself from extremists in Herzegovina and instituting a more open financial relationship with the Croat components of the federation army.
It has pioneered free trade agreements with FYROM and Slovenia and now with Bosnia and Herzegovina.
It played an extremely helpful role in supporting the democratically elected government of Montenegro in withstanding pressure from the Milosevic regime.
At the same time, the government has started to make real reforms at home - politically and economically - that have led us to conclude that Croatia would be able to uphold the substantial obligations which a stabilisation and association agreement entails.
Last month, as the House knows, Croatia hosted, with extremely impressive efficiency and diplomatic finesse, the historic Zagreb Summit.
I do not think that is a bad record for a year.
So I am pleased, if not surprised, that Parliament backs our judgement that it was right to proceed quickly to begin these negotiations with Croatia.
I share many of the observations in the report.
I strongly agree, for example, that we need substantially to increase our financial support for Croatia under the CARDS regulation.
We have a team of officials in Croatia this week to look at programming for next year.
I strongly endorse Parliament's view.
I know that it is the strong view of the Croatian Government that countries participating in the stabilisation and association process must be judged on an individual basis on their own merits.
The agreements must be tailored to their particular circumstances and adjusted to the rate of progress that they have made.
That is certainly our approach, and the speed with which we have adjusted our policy towards Croatia in recent months testifies to that.
We also naturally want to see countries participating in the stabilisation and association process taking the lead not just in establishing closer relations with the European Union but with each other too.
This is not - and I want to emphasise this point - a sort of back-door attempt to try and recreate Yugoslavia.
It is an underlining in our relations with these countries of what has been our own experience.
We coped with appalling political division.
We coped with turmoil by coming together, by trying to work together economically and politically.
It should not come as a surprise to countries which want a better relationship with us, which want a closer relationship with us, which want to join us in the European family, when we insist on exactly the same for them.
In the last year Croatia has embarked boldly and decisively on the road to Europe, but there remains, despite recent progress, some way to go.
We will need to see a strong continuing commitment on the part of Croatia and on the part of other governments in the region to refugee return - a point which a couple of honourable Members referred to.
Above all we will need to see continuing economic and institutional reform, the establishment of a genuinely free economy, reform of property law, the strengthening of the independence of the judiciary and the protection of the rights of minorities.
There will also need to be serious reform of the media, with a real effort to create a genuinely open and pluralistic media environment, living up to the highest professional standards of impartiality and independence, especially in television.
So we will continue to need the support of this Parliament as we urge our Croatian friends to press on with these reforms, many of which will bring pain before the gains are evident.
We welcome Parliament's support so far, not least on the important question of the legal base for the stabilisation and association agreements.
This is an important point for us and we will, I hope, be able to count on Parliament's support when we come back to consult you formally once we have negotiated the agreement.
The conclusion of the stabilisation and association agreement will, of course, be subject to the assent of this Parliament.
With the start of these negotiations, Croatia has embarked on a new era in its relations with the European Union.
Croatia has won many friends in Europe for the role it has played in the last year and for the progress it has achieved.
Of course, in many respects the hard part is only just beginning, but I have every confidence that the people of Croatia are equal to the challenge, equal to the difficult path of reform, the path to Europe that now lies ahead.
We in the European Commission look forward to helping Croatia to meet that challenge and to helping Croatia along that road.
As I said at the outset, this year began with the people of Croatia and their new democratic government lighting a candle.
I think it was remarkably important for the whole region.
We owe it to Croatia to give the government and people of Croatia every help in the years ahead and we are extremely grateful to the honourable Member for his wise advice in ensuring that we pursue this route.
That concludes the debate.
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
I should like to thank all colleagues who contributed to the debate and kept so well to their speaking time.
It is unusual for this Parliament.
I will be severe from now on.
Developing closer relations with Indonesia
The next item is the report (A5-0323/2000) by Mrs Maij-Weggen, on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy, on the communication from the Commission to the Council and to the European Parliament on developing closer relations between Indonesia and the European Union [COM(2000) 50 - C5-0288/2000 - 2000/2152(COS)].
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, when the Commission issued its communication on relations between Indonesia and the European Union a year ago, Indonesia seemed to be on the way to a true democracy under the Wahid government, which had newly taken office.
A year on, the picture looks far less optimistic.
The road to democracy, to respect for human rights, to a sound administrative and legal system, to the eradication of corruption, seems to be a long road beset with obstacles.
Here is a great deal of opposition to the Wahid government and the process appears to have come to a standstill.
This opposition to the democratically elected government comes from various quarters, from military circles, from the supporters of the corrupt Suharto regime, from groups of fanatical Muslims, and from armed militia circles.
The President is also still under fire over the Bulog and Brunei affair.
However, it is important that the Vice-President and the President of Parliament have declared their loyalty to the President.
The problem the government is struggling with is seen most clearly in the regions that were used as migration destinations owing to over-population, and that were also misused as conquered land.
Worst of all is the situation in Irian Jaya and the Moluccas.
It is incomprehensible, in this respect, that the Laskar Jihad was given the chance this spring to go to the Moluccas in their thousands, in order to stoke up the conflicts there again.
This has left the Moluccas with thousands of dead and several hundred thousands of refugees.
People are very afraid at present - and that includes the 50 000 Moluccan citizens in the Netherlands - that the situation will escalate further around Christmas.
We have received reports to the effect that the Laskar Jihad is preparing to launch a new offensive, in West-Irian among other places, but also in small countries such as Gorom and Lusalaut.
People are being killed because they are Christians.
People are being locked up in churches and forced to convert to Islam.
There are even reports that the Laskar Jihad has banned all Christian church bells from ringing at Christmas.
What we are seeing is religious terror.
As rapporteur I find that intolerable and I would therefore ask the Commissioner what the European Union can do with respect to the Wahid government in order to prevent further bloodshed.
Then there is Irian Jaya.
The violence is escalating there too.
More people died this weekend.
Last week, hundreds of students were picked up and four of them were returned to their parents as corpses.
There are still some Papuan leaders under lock and key too.
We expressly wanted to respect the territorial integrity of Indonesia in our resolution, but surely that cannot mean the people of Irian Jaya having to renounce their own culture and identity?
That sort of violence only stirs up feelings of hatred.
I would like to lend my voice to the warning issued by the United States government to the effect that the violence must stop.
The EU ought to take the same line.
Peace is very far from being restored in Timor and Aceh.
In Timor, the militias block the return of the refugees and relief workers are besieged.
And the murder of the Dutch journalist Thoenes has not been investigated yet.
Three more relief workers died in Aceh last week and fifteen died at the beginning of December.
Mr President, these regional problems are the worst in Indonesia at the moment.
As such, the plans to give these regions more autonomy are to be welcomed, as are the undertakings to leave more revenue from raw materials to the regions.
As far as the overall approach in Indonesia is concerned, things are in fact heading in the right direction.
But it is precisely these problems in the regions that are still very much apparent.
What can the role of the European Union be?
Indonesia is one of the most important countries in the ASEAN area.
It is important for the whole area for Indonesia to be a stable, democratic constitutional state with good relations within and outside ASEAN.
The European Union must support the democratic and socio-economic developments, but not unquestioningly.
We must attach conditions to our aid and support.
We must see signs of progress in the democratisation process, the human rights situation must improve, the violators of human rights must be tried, corruption must be tackled and the power of the army must be further reduced.
Should this fail to happen then aid will have to be suspended if necessary.
There should also be far more coordination of aid at European level.
The EU embassy in Jakarta could assume a coordinating role.
We also ask the European Commission to follow this policy line in our resolution.
Lastly, with all due respect for the sovereignty of Indonesia, if violence erupts again in the Moluccas and on Irian Jaya around Christmas, then international action should not be ruled out in our view.
I have in mind sending UN observers to the crisis areas, where action is urgently needed, but also humanitarian relief action if necessary.
The murder really must stop.
Certainly that committed by army units, militias and militant Muslims.
Otherwise, what is the difference between the Wahid government and the old Suharto regime?
We are very concerned and expect the European Commission to respond to these developments.
Mr President, I would like to compliment Mrs Maij-Weggen on her excellent report, and thank her for the pleasant cooperation we have had.
Political stability and respect for human rights and the constitutional state are key to economic recovery following the Asia crisis.
They are also pre-requisite to closer cooperation between the European Union and Indonesia.
On behalf of the Committee on Industry, External Trade, Research and Energy, I will restrict what I have to say to three points.
We are concerned about the high degree of corruption and nepotism in the Indonesian economy.
Too many members of former ruling families still wield power.
This is a major obstacle to economic recovery and social stability in the region and therefore needs to be tackled.
Secondly, it is essential for the private banking sector in Indonesia to be restructured.
The agency for the restructuring of the Indonesian banks, the so-called Ibra, has so far been unable to allow the merchant banks to resume their loans service.
What is more, the Ibra has considerable financial interests in various enterprises.
It is even the sole shareholder in a few companies.
These enterprises ought to be privatised.
At the same time, this would create new opportunities for much-needed foreign investment.
Finally, economic relations with Indonesia are now based on the ASEAN agreement.
So far, the ASEAN countries have made little progress as regards economic integration, even though the establishment of a free-trade zone between the members has been mooted for years now.
My committee has therefore asked to conclude a bilateral cooperation agreement between the European Union and Indonesia.
I will take this opportunity to ask Commissioner Patten to investigate this possibility, along with his colleague Mr Lamy.
Mr President, the positive developments that have been seen in Indonesia are unquestionable, to the extent that they suggest that a new relationship and effective cooperation with that country are in order.
Thus the terms of the Commission' s communication at the beginning of the year are justified, even if it is marked by a certain euphoria surely resulting from those changes.
The internal challenges facing Indonesia are, however, enormous and complex, as revealed by more recent events.
There is the explosive situation in Irian Jaya, exacerbated by the use of repressive methods; there is also the difficult situation in Aceh and the Moluccas; in addition there is the dramatic situation experienced by refugees in the camps in West Timor - and the lack of measures that could change it - where the militias still act with impunity; and all this is tied up with the pressure from the former Suharto regime and the significant capacity for manoeuvring of military groups clearly identified with it and openly linked with integrationist and nationalist movements.
These facts can only concern us, and therefore the initial optimism that was so clear in the Commission' s communication should be reconsidered and tempered to some extent.
There is no doubt that cooperation with Indonesia should be strengthened, and it should be directed into support for the authorities of this country in fields such as improvements in administration, the fight against fraud and corruption, the judicial system, environmental protection and improvements, or humanitarian aid for the displaced and refugees.
But the level of this cooperation must take into account the effective progress the country may make in solving regional problems and the methods used for solving them, its respect for human rights, and also the country' s collaboration in the positive development of the Timor Lorosae independence process, particularly in solving the problems faced by the West Timor refugees and in prosecuting and sentencing militia members who have behaved criminally and only recently murdered three United Nations workers.
I believe the report by our colleague, Mrs Maij-Weggen, who in fact knows the situation well, satisfactorily addresses these aspects and therefore deserves our full approval.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, I should like to begin by congratulating Mrs Maij-Weggen on the excellent job she has done.
The democratisation process in Indonesia deserves due recognition and therefore support.
One of the clearest expressions of this process, but also of the contradictions that make it so fragile, was what happened in East Timor.
When the right to self-determination had been accepted, in the time between the popular vote and the recognition of the result, armed militias supported by Indonesian troops executed a detailed plan to destroy public infrastructure and thousands of homes, ruin crops and farming implements, and persecute the population, which, in terror, took refuge in the mountains and in West Timor.
As part of a delegation from this Parliament, I was one of the international observers of the ballot and witnessed the Timorese people' s amazing thirst for freedom, but I also had the impression that as soon as we had gone nothing would be left standing.
There are still contradictions like this in Indonesia, whether in the Moluccas, Aceh or Irian Jaya, and they are still manifest in East Timor too.
The prosecution of those who committed crimes in East Timor and are now in Indonesian territory has yet to take place.
It is unacceptable that they should escape justice because of a recently enacted law.
More than one hundred thousand refugees remain in West Timor, virtual human shields for the originators and perpetrators of crimes in East Timor.
I was in these refugee camps earlier this year.
In them are those who committed crimes and those who witnessed them.
The justice which is not being done and the refugee camps which are becoming permanent are areas for confrontation between the old and the new powers in Indonesia and reveal the fragility of the democratisation process.
Only this week, top UNTAET officials were at serious risk when they left the Indonesian parliament building in Jakarta after meeting the country' s president.
We can support the democratisation process, as we have been doing; what we cannot do is take the place of the protagonists in this process.
Mr President, Indonesia is struggling but is emerging victorious.
The revolution in the country and the way in which it took place, remain the basis for cautious optimism.
But the excellent report by Mrs Maij-Weggen also underlines the fact that Indonesia' s problems have increased rather than decreased.
The country is not unique in that respect.
After all, these problems are characteristic of a country that is having to undergo a multifaceted transition.
It must develop a new identity with a better balance between the centre and peripheral areas.
On the economic front, the market must throw off the shackles of far-reaching state interference and attract new investment.
The poverty issue is extremely pressing.
A hybrid society must be turned into a transparent one.
Corruption must be tackled.
The EU could lend a hand there, by talking to European companies.
Old structures must be dismantled so that Indonesia can at last get a grip on itself.
Many current problems are down to a lack of democratic control, for example over those parts of the army that resist change and loss of privilege.
In many places, violence prevails over dialogue.
What gives most cause for concern is the situation in the Moluccas, where Jihad fighters are left to their own devices in a manner which is insupportable.
The government in Jakarta should do far more to get a grip on the situation on the ground, and the EU must continue to bring the necessary pressure to bear, partly as an expression of the increased responsibility that the European Union must take for the region.
If these efforts should fall short of the mark, then we cannot afford to rule out the possibility of the international community becoming more actively involved.
When a country starts functioning as a constitutional state again, it must also settle old scores.
This process is moving very slowly.
The old structures resist the due process of justice.
This is hardly surprising given that they have been accessories to crimes in many cases.
We ask, and demand, that the culprits be tracked down and tried, be they the Suharto family or the murderers of the Dutch journalist Sander Thoenes.
Relations between Indonesia and the EU can only improve further if we know that our allies really hold sway there, and that the constitutional state is functioning properly.
Mr President, the traces of Suharto are very far from erased in Indonesia.
Military influence may have been reduced but is still far too great.
Corruption is still rampant.
Ongoing violence on the Moluccas, in Aceh and in Irian Jaya is causing great suffering among the people.
President Wahid and Vice-President Sukarnoputri have been unable to demonstrate a great deal of governmental power so far.
It is very important for Europe to support the economic and democratic developments in Indonesia.
But as Mrs Maij-Weggen has already said, this assistance comes at a price.
It must benefit the poorest sections of the population.
The violation of human rights must stop, the proceeds from corruption must be traced, and above all, wealth must be far better distributed.
It is very difficult to hold this immense realm together.
Fortunately, the time when a handful of Dutchmen were able to do so is now past.
But poor administration, where the military are left to wreak havoc undisturbed, feeds the desire for independence.
The origin of the conflict on the Moluccas mainly lies in Suharto' s ill-considered migration policy, which disturbed the population balance.
The situation on these islands is still alarming.
Only if an impartial army steps in will there be a chance of peace.
The international community must bring maximum pressure to bear on Jakarta in order to put an end to the violence on the Moluccas.
More humanitarian aid must be delivered.
The same applies to ECHO, which, I might add, is doing a first-rate job out there.
Irian Jaya is also suffering the effects of migration policy.
Here too the local people are frustrated by the immigration of Muslims and the hard line taken by the military.
It is of paramount importance that those guilty of human rights violations are not allowed to get away with it.
I concur with those of my colleagues who are demanding an immediate judicial inquiry into the murder of Sander Thoenes.
Mrs Maij-Weggen has written an outstanding report and I would therefore conclude that Europe must do all it can to support the country on its way to democracy, but at the end of the day, it is up to the Indonesians themselves to erase the traces of the Suharto regime.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I shall begin by bringing two dates to your attention.
Here, tomorrow, we shall have the presentation of the Sakharov Prize.
A year ago, this prize was, in fact, conferred on President Xanana Gusmão.
At that time, we honoured the efforts, the courage and the example of the Timorese people.
In February this year, the Commission embarked on a new political initiative with regard to Indonesia, to which we also gave our approval here.
In my view, I am sad to say, I think we were all a little hasty.
I am sad to say this because I too would have liked things to have turned out well in Indonesia.
I too would have liked to see the benefit of the doubt that we hastened to give reciprocated.
But, unfortunately, this year has shown that it was not to be.
As Mrs Maij-Weggen pointed out here in her introductory statement - which I emphatically support, together with the force of her report - the situation in Indonesia is deteriorating.
We must learn from this lesson by sending Indonesia clearer and unambiguous signals, not contradictory ones.
I believe Indonesia is a great country, but it is at a crossroads, and it depends on the efforts of the international community and the European Union whether, at this crossroads, it will swing for good towards democracy, respect for human rights and the rule of law, or whether the disorder will increase.
To this end, we must learn to choose priorities: we cannot mix environmental issues, social policy issues or economic policy issues all at the same level as the key problem of respect for democracy and human rights, which clearly has to be a political priority in our relationship with Indonesia.
I also say we must give a clear signal, because we cannot have a two-speed policy: sometimes we seem to criticise but then we seem to do nothing.
We must learn from this year' s experience, which has been a beneficial experience, and give a very powerful signal indicating the change that we want for Indonesia.
Mr President, the rapporteur, Mrs Maij-Weggen, makes crystal-clear what the real political problems are in Indonesia.
She is quite forthright in naming the opposing forces of the essential and exacting process of reform.
She rightly refers to them in her report as still being very powerful.
However, following the latest reports from the Indonesian archipelago, we are compelled to ask whether the situation does not in fact look more serious, more precarious still for President Wahid and his brothers-in-arms, than the report would suggest.
Yesterday, an insider summed up the situation in the Indonesian archipelago with the following sentence: 'the reformation is stagnating and the restoration minus the Suharto family promotes stagnation.'
Stagnation of the reformation in no way implies that the way to a democratic constitutional state - and I quote the rapporteur - 'is truly leading nowhere' .
Hence now is the time for the European Union to carefully support, as far as it is able, the democratic forces, which are neither numerous nor strong.
In view of the historical burden that sits on the shoulders of two present-day Indonesian regions, the Moluccas and Irian Jaya, Indonesian and western understanding for this distressing historical millstone alone would relieve a great deal of political tension and suffering.
This is most definitely a task for the European Community.
The report that winged its way to me from Indonesia offers a ray of hope.
Despite these uncertain times, a growing number of people within the Christian churches out there are calling for people to do some soul-searching.
They want people to stop working to secure the interests of their own groups and show sympathy towards their fellow human beings, including Muslims, out of the love of Christ, which offers hope of reconciliation to the entire, and sometimes sorely afflicted, archipelago.
Mr President, I congratulate Mrs Maij-Weggen on an excellent report.
I know she has great experience of Indonesia and, in particular, the Indonesian Moluccan community living in Holland.
The position we have to take regarding the territorial integrity of Indonesia is simple: we have to abide by international law and by the United Nations Resolution 2504 of December 1969.
That resolution categorically affirms that Irian Jaya is part of Indonesia.
It is something that all our countries have agreed to, have signed up to, and have a responsibility to support.
It was a recognition by the global community of the legality of the vote in Irian Jaya to become a permanent part of Indonesia and reaffirm United Nations Declaration 1514 of 1960 which prohibits any act aimed at the partial or total disruption of the national unity and territorial integrity of a country.
The situation in Irian Jaya is totally different, legally and constitutionally, from the situation that pertained to East Timor.
Parliament should not confuse the two.
Irian Jaya is an integral part of Indonesia historically.
East Timor never was.
The rule of law must therefore prevail.
Yes, of course we must ensure that Indonesia maintains its progress in the prosecution of those members of the security forces accused of human rights violations. In this case we must wield the carrot and the stick.
Any outside intervention other than support for democratisation and the rule of law can only be seen as counterproductive and inflammatory to all parties.
There will be no winners if we take an imperial stance on this issue.
I use that word advisedly.
What we can do in the European Parliament and the EU is to ask the new democratic Indonesian Government not to over-react.
Over-reaction will play into the hands of the separatists, turning terrorists into martyrs and heroes.
The other activity we can undertake immediately is to give massive support to good governance projects in Indonesia: support in terms of manpower, money, NGO activity, setting standards and criteria so that the devolved administrative arrangement now agreed by President Wahid can be underpinned by creating lasting democratic and civil society institutions.
If we want to help Indonesia we must act now with money and deeds, not merely words.
Mr President, I should like to add my words to those of my colleagues, regarding both the content of the report and in congratulating Mrs Maij-Weggen on her realistic approach to it, and especially for being true to the values and principles of our European Union.
I believe it is essential, when stating the route to cooperation with Indonesia, to be vigilant about the application of values and the establishment of the rule of law.
